===== PAGE 1 =====

Algebraic, analytic and geometric structures
emerging from quantum field theory
4-16 March 2024, Chengdu, China
Organisers: Bin Zhang (Chengdu) Li Guo (Rutgers) Sylvie Paycha (Potsdam)

===== PAGE 2 =====

ALGEBRAIC, ANALYTIC AND GEOMETRIC STRUCTURES
EMERGING FROM QUANTUM FIELD THEORY
SPEAKERS
Li Guo 3
Sylvie Paycha 3
Bin Zhang 3
Carlo Bellingeri 5
Cl´ ement Cren 5
Alexandre Ferreira 5
Yannic Vargas 6
Fabrizio Zanello 6
Carlos Amendola 8
Carlo Bellingeri 8
Pierre Clavier 8
Cl´ ement Cren 8
Fay Dowker 9
Alexandre Fereira 9
Alessandra Frabetti 9
Yanyong Hong 10
Naihong Hu 10
Jean-David Jacques 10
Cuibo Jiang 10
Honglai Lang 11
Gihyun Lee 11
Fang Li 11
Si Li 11
1

===== PAGE 3 =====

2 SPEAKERS
Yong Li 12
Jiasheng Lin 12
Sarah-Jean Meyer 12
Martin Peev 13
Rapha¨ el Ponge 13
Alberto Richtsfeld 13
David Sauzin 13
Yunhe Sheng 14
Harprit Singh 14
Sumati Surya 14
Reiko Toriumi 15
Yannic Vargas 15
Hang Wang 15
Xin Wang 16
Xiaomeng Xu 16
Jorge Zanelli 16
Fabrizio Zanello 16
Honglian Zhang 16
Yuanyuan Zhang 17
Guodong Zhou 17

===== PAGE 4 =====

Introductory courses: March 1–3 (West 303, Math Building)
Times Friday Saturday Sunday
8:30–9:20 Guo Guo Guo
9:30–10:20 Guo Guo Guo
10:30–11:20 Paycha Paycha Paycha
11:30–14:00 Lunch break
14:00–14:50 Paycha Paycha Paycha
15:00–15:50 Zhang Zhang Zhang
15:50–16:30 Question break
16:30–17:20 Zhang Zhang Zhang
Abstracts: Introductory Courses (March 1–3)
Li Guo
Rutgers University
Title: Algebraic and combinatorial prerequisites
• Hopf algebras
• Algebraic combinatorics
• Non-associative algebras
Sylvie Paycha
Universit¨ at Potsdam
Title: Geometric and analytic prerequisites
• Distributions, Wave front sets
• Pseudodifferential operators, Fourier integral operators
• Index theory
Bin Zhang
Sichuan University, Chengdu
Title: Differential geometric and algebraico-geometric prerequisites
• Vector bundle, principal bundle
• Connection, curvature, characteristic classes

===== PAGE 5 =====

Mini-courses: March 4–8 (West 303, Math Building)
Times Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday
8:30–9:20 Bellingeri Cren Fereira Vargas Zanello
9:30-10:20 Cren Fereira Vargas Zanello Bellingeri
10:20-10:40 Break
10:40–11:30 Vargas Fereira Zanello Bellingeri Cren
11:30–14:00 Lunch break
14:00–14:50 Vargas Zanello Bellingeri Cren Fereira
15:00–15:50 Zanello Bellingeri Cren Fereira Vargas
15:50–16:30 Break
16:30–17:30 Jiasheng Lin Guodong Zhou Yuanyuan Zhang Jean-David Jacques Honglian Zhang

===== PAGE 6 =====

STRUCTURES FROM QFT 5
Abstracts: Mini-courses (March 4-8)
Carlo Bellingeri
Universit´ e de Lorraine, Nancy
Title: Hopf algebras and randomness
In this series of lectures, I will give an introduction to the theory of Hopf algebras and their applications to some
new and old problems in stochastics. I’ll start from the usual setting of graded connected Hopf algebras and explain
how these objects represent the abstract framework to describe features of random objects such as random variables,
stochastic processes and random fields. A fundamental example to understand these constructions is given by the
well-known Connes-Kreimer Hopf algebra. I will review its main properties and show how the explicit knowledge
of its primitive elements allows the construction of a consistent pathwise stochastic calculus on general stochastic
processes. Some content of this mini-course will be based on an ongoing work with Emilio Rossi Ferrucci and Nikolas
Tapia.
Cl´ ement Cren
Georg-August Universit¨ at, G¨ ottingen, Germany
Title: Pseudodifferential calculus and deformation groupoids
In recent years the theory of deformation groupoids has given new insights on pseudodifferential calculus. We know
since the early work of Connes the link between the tangent groupoid and the analytical index of such operators. More
recent work have deepened this bond by showing how one could define pseudodifferential operators in a completely
intrinsic fashion using the tangent groupoid (even without using distributions).
In this series of lectures we will define the tangent groupoid of a manifold and show how to construct pseudodif-
ferential operators from it. No prior knowledge on pseudodifferential operators nor groupoids is necessary. We will
compare the two different approaches to pseudodifferential calculus from the tangent groupoid (the one of Debord-
Skandalis on one hand and van Erp-Yuncken on the other). Depending on time we might see how this approach
generalizes to other pseudodifferential calculi, more suited for a sub-riemannian seting for instance, or explore the
link between the deformations of the tangent groupoid and Getzler’s rescaling technique.
Alexandre Ferreira
Universidade Federal do Esp´ ırito Santo (Vitoria, Brazil)
Title: Deriving quantum dynamics from maps between manifolds
In this minicourse I will introduce a generalized dynamics, given through maps between manifolds, the source
space being the configuration space and the target representing the internal structure of the field. Under some
simple assumptions, we can derive from there the Schroedinger equation. The latter yields interesting geometrical
interpretations for some of its uncanny properties, such as non-locality. The minicourse will start with a thorough

===== PAGE 7 =====

6 SPEAKERS
review of manifold mapping theory and its applications in physics. Subsequently, I will introduce the Schroedinger
map, establishing the foundation for the generalized dynamics, and show how classical and quantum mechanics
emerge with some possible generalizations.
Yannic Vargas
Technische Universit¨ ot, Graz, Austria
Title: Introduction to combinatorial species by means of algebraic combinatorics, geometry and
physics
This short course is intended to provide an introduction to the theory of combinatorial species, with a focus on
various (new) applications that have emerged from this theory over the last two decades. In 1981, Andr´ e Joyal
introduced this notion as “a combinatorial theory of formal power series,” and since then, the field has garnered
significant attention as a formal foundation for reinterpreting combinatorial aspects of various problems in Hopf
algebras, hyperplane arrangements and quantum field theory.
Fabrizio Zanello
Universit¨ at Potsdam, Germany
Title: Introduction to perturbative algebraic quantum field theory on Minkowski spacetime
In these lectures we present the algebraic approach to Quantum Field Theory in its simplest framework, namely,
on flat Lorentzian spacetime. We first introduce observables as elements of an abstract algebra, prior to any rep-
resentation on some Hilbert space. We then outline the appropriate analytical framework, essentially based on
microlocal analysis techniques, which allows to interpret a quantum field theory as a deformation quantization of
its classical counterpart. Finally, with these notions at hand, we approach the interaction picture from the point of
view of the so-called causal perturbation theory and, if time permits, we formulate the renormalization problem in
a mathematically rigorous way.

===== PAGE 8 =====

Workshop: March 11–15 (Even Hotel)
Times Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday
Chair Sylvie Paycha Alessandra Frabetti Fay Dowker Carlo Bellingeri Jorge Zanelli
8:30–9:20 David Sauzin Si Li Jorge Zanelli Carlos Amendola Cuibo Jiang
9:30–10:20 Yong Li Alberto Richtsfeld Xin Wang Honglei Lang Yangyong Hong
10:20–10:50 Break
10:50–11:40 Sumati Surya Hang Wang Xiaomeng Xu Yunhe Sheng Alexandre Fereira
12:00–14:00 Lunch
Chair Bin Zhang David Sauzin Reiko Torium Sumati Surya
14:00–14:50 Fay Dowker Cl´ ement Cren Harprit Singh Reiko Toriumi
15:00–15:50 Fabrizio Zanello Rapha¨ el Ponge Martin Peev Jiasheng Lin
15:50–16:20 Break
16:20–17:10 Sarah-Jean Meyer Gihyun Lee Pierre Clavier Naihong Hu
17:20–18:10 Carlo Bellingeri Fang Li Yannic Vargas Alessandra Frabetti
18:30 Conference dinner 19:30: Film: Words of women...

===== PAGE 9 =====

8 SPEAKERS
Abstracts: Workshop (March 11–15)
Carlos Amendola
Technische Universit¨ at Berlin, Germany
Title: From path signatures to algebraic varieties
The signature of a parametric curve is a sequence of tensors whose entries are iterated integrals. This construction
is central to the theory of rough paths in stochastic analysis. We examine such path signatures through the lens
of algebraic geometry by introducing varieties of signature tensors for both deterministic paths and random paths.
In this way, we present a bridge between applied algebraic geometry and stochastic analysis where rough paths are
encoded in signature tensors, and whose varieties offer a concise representation of geometric data seen in applications.
Carlo Bellingeri
Universit´ e de Nancy 1, France
Title: The Euler-Maclaurin formula and generalised iterated integrals
Considered one of the key identities in classical analysis, the Euler-McLaurin formula is one of the standard tools
for relating sums and integrals, with remarkable applications in many areas of mathematics, although it is little used
in stochastic analysis. In this talk, we will show how, by introducing new variants of the iterated integrals of a path
and a simple variational problem, we can generalise this identity in the context of Riemann Stieltjes integration.
Joint work with Sylvie Paycha (Potsdam) and Peter Friz ( TU Berlin and WIAS)
Pierre Clavier
Universit´ e de Haute Alsace, Mulhouse, France
Title: Grafting and cografting for species
Recall that a species is a functor from the category of sets to the category of vector spaces. An example that will
serve as a common thread througout this non-technical talk is the species of rooted trees. To a set it associates the
vector space spanned by all rooted trees decorated by the set under consideration. I will describe classical operations
on species and present species with products (monoid species) and further equipped with up and down operators.
Following the structure of rooted trees, I will introduce grafting and cografting of species, and show that it leads to
natural up and down operators with interesting algebraic properties. Finally I will show that the species of trees has
a universal property in the category of monoids with up operators.
Work in collaboration with Yannic Vargas and Sylvie Paycha.
Cl´ ement Cren
Georg-August-Universit¨ at G¨ ottingen, Germany

===== PAGE 10 =====

STRUCTURES FROM QFT 9
Title: Transversal index theory and filtered calculus
Abstract: We know since the work Atiyah and Singer that elliptic (pseudo)differentiel operators are Fredholm
and that their index can be computed by algebro-geometric methods. When the operator is not elliptic, interesting
things can still happen. On the one hand, the symbol does not take into account a whole subbundle that forms
a foliation. The operator can then be interpreted (following Atiyah, Connes, Hilsum-Skandalis...) as an elliptic
operator on the space of leaves of the foliation (which in general fails to be a genuine manifold). On the other hand,
the operator can only be elliptic on a certain subbundle but this subbundle generates all the whole tangent space
through the Lie bracket of sections (typically a sub-laplacian in sub-riemannian geometry). Then the operator is
still Fredholm but understanding this goes through a new pseudodifferential calculus. This calculus heavily relies on
the filtration given by the aforementioned subbundle and the subbundles obtained by iteration of the Lie bracket
of sections and has recently known huge developpents (van Erp-Yuncken, Androulidakis-Mohsen-Yuncken). In this
calculus the ellipticity condition is replaced by the so-called Rockland condition, involving irreducible representations
of certain nilpotent groups. In this talk we will combine the two situations and consider operators that suffer both
of these flaws. We set the adequate geometric context of foliated filtration, this corresponds to foliated manifolds
whose space of leaves has a filtered (e.g. sub-riemannian) structure. We then define a transverse Rockland condition
and proceed to construct K-theory classes from operators satisfying this condition and show the relations between
these classes.
Fay Dowker
Imperial College, London, England
Title: A diagrammatic calculus for interacting scalar QFT on a causal set
An interacting QFT on a causal set has been independently proposed by Dable-Heath, Fewster, Rejzner and
Woods and by Sorkin, Albertini and Jubb. I will show how to use the ”2nd quantized” form of QFT to calculate
in-in time ordered correlators, order by order in coupling, using a diagrammatic calculus. I will describe the rules
for generating the diagrams, which are manifestly causal.
Alexandre Fereira
Federal University of Itajuba, Brazil
Title: On the physics of degenerate dynamical systems
Dynamical systems typically possess a constant-rank symplectic structure, indicating that the determinant of
the Lagrangian Hessian either differs from or equals zero throughout their evolution. The latter scenario implies
that certain degrees of freedom are not physical. Consequently, degenerate systems represent a generalization of
standard dynamics; in these systems, the determinant has a simple zero only on a surface in phase space known
as the degenerate surface. On this surface, the system can become trapped, leading to the loss of some degrees
of freedom. This phenomenon, observed initially in Lovelock gravity theories for dimensions greater than 4, is a
prominent characteristic of gravitation and supergravity theories. In these theories, the dynamic loss of degrees of
freedom serves as a mechanism for dimensional reduction, making it a significant potential feature of UV completions
of current theories. In this presentation, I will explore various properties of degenerate systems, both classical and
quantum, and provide examples of field theories where this phenomenon can occur.
Alessandra Frabetti
Universit´ e de Lyon 1, France
Title: Non-associative renormalization group

===== PAGE 11 =====

10 SPEAKERS
Renormalization Hopf algebras represent the renormalization group of (perturbative) quantum field theory as a
functor. In practice, this is a group of formal diffeomorphisms in the powers of the coupling constant with coefficients
given by the couterterms of divergent graphs, and the ”functorial representation” makes sense only for commutative
coefficients and commutative Hopf algebras. However, in quantum electrodynamics and in quantum chromodynamics
the coefficients of the series and the natural renormalization Hopf algebras are not commutative. In this talk I explain
how we can still use them to represent a renormalization action, if we renounce to the associativity of the ”group”
and see it as a ”loop” (a non-associative group).
Yanyong Hong
Hangzhou Normal University, China
Title: Infinite-dimensional Lie bialgebras via affinization of (multi-)Novikov bialgebras
In this talk, I will introduce some basic facts on Novikov algebras, multi-Novikov algebras and infinite-dimensional
Lie algebras. Then I will introduce the theory of (multi-) Novikov bialgebras and their connections with infinite-
dimensional Lie bialgebras. This talk is based on joint works with Chengming Bai and Li Guo.
Naihong Hu
East China Normal University, China
Title: Some quantization questions related to the two-parameter quantum groups
This is a survey talk including some recent results joint with Xuiao Xu, Hengyi Wang and Rushu Zhuang. One
is about the isolcasses of one-parameter exotic quantum small groups at roots of unity, The second is about the
descriptions of the Harish-Chandra homomorphism Theorem for two-parameter quantum groups of even rank. If
the time permits, I will also talk about the 3rd one, which is about the RLL realizations of two-parameter quantum
(affine) algebras of BCD types, which establishes an isomorphism between the Drinfeld new realization of the two-
parameter quantum affine algebras and the RLL realization of them via RLL relations in the matrix form.
Jean-David Jacques
Universit¨ at Potsdam, Germany
Title: Post-Lie algebra of derivations and regularity structures
Post-Lie algebra structures are a generalization of Pre-Lie algebras. They have their roots in geometry and correspond
to the algebraic properties satisfied by the covariant derivative in the case of a flat and constant torsion connection.
In my talk, I will provide a brief overview of the new theory of regularity structures developed by F. Otto and
colleagues, and discuss how post-Lie algebra structures arise in this framework
Cuibo Jiang
Shanghai Jiaotong University, China
Title: Singular vectors and associated varieties of vertex algebras of A type
Given the simple Lie algebras sln and k = −n + p
q such that p, q ∈ Z+, p ≥ 2 and ( p, q) = 1, let V k(sln) be the
associated universal vertex algebras. We will talk about recent progress on determining singulars of V k(sln) and
associated varieties of the simple quotients of V k(sln). In particular, we completely determine the varieties of the
simple affine vertex algebras Lk(sl3) and the simple associated affine W -algebras.

===== PAGE 12 =====

STRUCTURES FROM QFT 11
Honglai Lang
China Agricultural University, Beijing, China
Title: Rota-Baxter Lie bialgebras and Rota-Baxter Poisson Lie groups
First we introduce the notion of quadratic Rota–Baxter Lie algebras of arbitrary weight, and show that there is
a one-to-one correspondence between factorizable Lie bialgebras and quadratic Rota–Baxter Lie algebras of nonzero
weight. Then we introduce the notions of matched pairs, bialgebras and Manin triples of Rota–Baxter Lie algebras,
and show that Rota–Baxter Lie bialgebras, Manin triples of Rota–Baxter Lie algebras and certain matched pairs of
Rota–Baxter Lie algebras are equivalent. Finally, we present some results on Rota-Baxter Poisson Lie Groups. This
is joint work in progress with Yunhe Sheng.
Gihyun Lee
Universiteit Gent, Belgium
Title: A calculus for magnetic pseudodifferential super operators
Abstract: The time evolution of a physical state is determined by the Liouville equation dρ
dt = − i
ℏ(Hρ − ρH) in
quantum mechanics. Here ρ is the density operator describing a given physical state and H is the Hamiltonian of a
given system. Here we can observe that the Liouville operator ρ 7→ LH ρ := − i
ℏ(Hρ − ρH) is a super operator, i.e.,
it assigns operators to operators.
On the other hand, various kinds of pseudodifferential calculi has been developed in mathematics and applied to
the study of PDE, geometry and mathematical physics. The main idea behind these theories of pseudodifferential
calculi is to construct systematic ways of assigning linear operators to symbol functions, which enables us to translate
properties of functions to properties of linear operators.
In this talk, I will introduce a novel pseudodifferential calculus of super operators in the magnetic setting and ex-
plain how the Liouville super operator LH can be incorporated into this new pseudodifferential theory. Furthermore,
the L2-boundedness of pseudodifferential super operators will be discussed. Based on the joint work with M. Lein.
Fang Li
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
Title: On 2nd-stage quantization of quantum cluster algebras
Motivated by the phenomenon that compatible Poisson structures on a cluster algebra play a key role on its
quantization (that is, quantum cluster algebra), we introduce the 2nd-stage quantization of a quantum cluster
algebra, which means the correspondence between compatible Poisson structures of the quantum cluster algebra and
its 2nd-stage quantized cluster algebras. Based on this observation, we find that a quantum cluster algebra possesses
a mutually alternating quantum cluster algebra such that their 2nd-stage quantization can be essentially the same.
As an example, we give the 2nd-stage quantized cluster algebra Ap,q(SL(2)) of F unC(SLq(2)) an show that it is
a non-trivial 2nd-stage quantization, which may be realized as a parallel supplement to two parameters quantization
of the general quantum group. As another example, we present a class of quantum cluster algebras with coefficients
which possess a non-trivial 2nd-stage quantization. In particular we obtain a class of quantum cluster algebras from
surfaces with coefficients which possess non-trivial 2nd-stage quantization.
Finally, we prove that the compatible Poisson structures of a quantum cluster algebra without coefficients is always
a locally standard Poisson structure. Following this, it is shown that the 2nd-stage quantization of a quantum cluster
algebra without coefficients is in fact trivial.
Si Li
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China

===== PAGE 13 =====

12 SPEAKERS
Title: Quantization and index theory
Abstract: We discuss some basic ideas and various recent mathematical developments on the connection between
quantization that arises from topological/chiral field theory and index type theorem. We illustrate renormalization
group flow as a version of Hochschild-Kostant-Rosenberg theorem. This comparison reveals a connection between
elliptic chiral homology of chiral algebras and a chiral analogue of algebraic index theory. This talk is based mainly
on a joint developing program with Zhengping Gui.
Yong Li
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Title: The asymptotic expansion conjecture on Seifert fibered homology sphere via resurgence theory
We introduce the Gukov-Pei-Putrov-Vafa (GPPV) invariant (or Z-hat invariant) in Chern-Simons theory associated
with a Seifert fibered integral homology sphere (SFIHS). As a corollary of Prof. Sauzin’s talk, the GPPV invariant
is essentially a partial theta series and a quantum modular form. Moreover, Ecalle’s alien derivations provide all
components of SL(2, C)-irreps of the fundamental group of the SFIHS. As the complex variable goes to a rational
number, the GPPV invariant becomes the Witten-Reshetikhin-Turaev (WRT) invariant. Simultaneously, onlySU (2)
components remain in the transseries expansion. This yields a proof of the so-called asymptotic expansion conjecture
of the WRT invariant of SFIHS.
This talk is based on the joint work with J. Andersen, L. Han, W. Mistegard, D. Sauzin and S. Sun.
Jiasheng Lin
Sorbonne University, Paris, France
Title: P (ϕ)2 measures on compact Riemannian surfaces, Segal gluing and applications
We outline the classical Nelson construction of the so-called P (ϕ)2 quantum field theory measure on compact
Riemannian surfaces (example. the ϕ4
2 measure), and discuss briefly how this works with the Markov property of
the GFF, and the (innocent) ”Bayes principle” to give a new proof of the Segal gluing axioms for P (ϕ)2. Then
we discuss a nice consequence of the Perron-Frobenius property of the Segal transfer operator about asymptotics of
zeta-determinants on cyclic cover surfaces.
Sarah-Jean Meyer
University of Oxford, England
Title: The FBSDE approach to sine-Gordon up to 6π
I will present a stochastic analysis of the sine-Gordon Euclidean quantum field (cos( βΦ))2on the full space up
to the second threshold, i.e. for β2 < 6π. The basis of the method is a stochastic quantisation equation given
by a forward-backward stochastic differential equation (FBSDE) for a decomposition ( Xt)(t ≥ 0) of the interacting
Euclidean field X∞ along a scale parameter t ≥ 0 using an approximate version of the renormalisation flow equation.
The FBSDE produces a scale-by-scale coupling of the interacting field with the Gaussian free field without cut-offs
and describes the optimiser of a stochastic control problem for the Euclidean QFT. I will explain the general set-up
for the FBSDE approach and provide some applications of the FBSDE in the case of the sine-Gordon model to
illustrate that it can be used effectively to obtain results about large deviations, integrability, decay of correlations
for local observables, singularity with respect to the free field, Osterwalder–Schrader axioms and other properties.
This is joint work with Massimiliano Gubinelli.

===== PAGE 14 =====

STRUCTURES FROM QFT 13
Martin Peev
Imperial College London, England
Title: Renormalising noncommutative SPDEs
When solving singular (bounded) operator-valued SPDE’s describing the stochastic quantisation of Fermions,
unbounded operators naturally appear. However, these cannot be directly equipped with a topology compatible with
a fixed-point argument.
I will give a short introduction to Stochastic Quantisation as well as the non-commutive probability necessary
to describe Fermions. Then, I will discuss a novel construction, based on ideas from non-commutative geometry,
allowing one to find non-commutative ”points” in an extension of the algebra of operators. Using these, one can
then construct local solutions analogous to pathwise solutions in stochastic PDE’s.
This talk is based on joint work with Ajay Chandra and Martin Hairer.
Rapha¨ el Ponge
Sichuan University, Chengdu
Title: Noncommutative geometry and semiclassical analysis
Semiclassical analysis and noncommutative geometry are distinct fields within the wider area of quantum theory.
Bridges between them have been emerging recently. This lays down on operator ideal techniques that are used in both
fields. In this talk we shall present semiclassical Weyl’s laws for Schr¨ odinger operators on noncommutative manifolds
(i.e., spectral triples). This shows that well known semiclassical Weyl’s laws in the commutative setting ultimately
holds in a purely noncommutative setting. This extends and simplifies previous work of McDonald-Sukochev-Zanin.
In particular, this allows us to get semiclassical Weyl’s laws on noncommutative tori of any dimension n ≥ 2,
which were only accessible in dimension n ≥ 3 by the MSZ approach. There are numerous other examples as well.
The approach relies on spectral asymptotics for some weak Schatten class operators. As a further application of
these asymptotics we obtain far reaching extensions of Connes’ integration formulas for noncommutative manifolds.
(For Riemannian closed manifolds, Connes’ integration shows that Connes’ NC integral recaptures the Riemannian
measure.)
Alberto Richtsfeld
Universit¨ at Potsdam, Germany
Title: Local index theory for the Rarita-Schwinger operator
We prove the local index theorem for the Rarita-Schwinger operator and higher Dirac operators using Gilkey’s
invariant theory. That is, we show that the supertrace of the heat kernel of a given geometric operator converges as
time goes to zero, and identifies the limit as the Chern-Weil form of the Atiyah-Singer integrand.
David Sauzin
Capital Normal University, Beijing, China on leave from CNRS { IMCCE, Paris, France
Title: Resurgence illustrated on partial theta series

===== PAGE 15 =====

14 SPEAKERS
This will be an initiation to Ecalle’s Resurgence theory and Alien Calculus illustrated on the example of partial
theta series, based on https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.15223 and https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.15029. What we call partial
theta series is a function of the form
Θ(τ) =
X
n>0
f(n)eiπn2τ .
with f : Z → C a periodic function, or the product of a power of n by such a function. The function Θ gives
rise to divergent asymptotic series at every rational point of the boundary of its domain of definition Im τ > 0. The
summability and resurgence properties of these series can be discussed by means of explicit formulas for their formal
Borel transforms, as well as the consequences for their modularity properties, or ”quantum modularity” in the sense
of Zagier’s recent theory. ´Ecalle’s ”alien derivations” allow one to encode this phenomenon in a kind of ”Bridge
equation”. Interesting examples stem from the study of Gukov-Pei-Putrov-Vafa invariants in Chern-Simons theory,
which are the topic of another talk in this workshop.
Yunhe Sheng
Jilin University, China
Title: Rota-Baxter operators on groups and post-groups
Rota-Baxter operators on Lie algebras were first studied by Belavin, Drinfeld and Semenov-Tian-Shansky as
operator forms of the classical Yang-Baxter equation. Integrating the Rota-Baxter operators on Lie algebras, we
introduce the notion of Rota-Baxter operators on Lie groups and more generally on groups. We discuss the notion of
post-groups, which is the underlying structure of Rota-Baxter operators on groups. Differentiating post-Lie groups
gives rise to post-Lie algebras. Post-groups are also related to braces and Lie-Butcher groups, and give rise to
solutions of Yang-Baxter equations. The talk is based on the joint work with Chengming Bai, Li Guo, Honglei Lang
and Rong Tang.
Harprit Singh
Edinburgh University, England
Title: Renormalisation of singular SPDEs on Riemannian manifolds
I shall discuss a generalisation of the theory of regularity structures which is able to treat singular SPDEs on
manifolds with values in vector bundles. After presenting some preliminary background, I shall focus on how positive
and negative renormalisation can be implemented in an intrinsic manner. Based on joint work with M. Hairer
Sumati Surya
Raman Research Institute, Bengalore, India
Title: Quantum dynamics in causal sets
Causal sets, or locally finite posets, are candidates for a discrete, causal theory of spacetime. In this talk I will review
a couple of proposals for constructing the quantum dynamics for causal sets and highlight some of the challenges these
bring with them. I will first describe recent results on the quantum partition function over causal sets which show how
the discrete Einstein-Hilbert action suppresses an entropically dominant class of non-spacetime-like causal sets, while
favouring (at least some) that are like spacetime. I will then describe a more constructive (or fundamentally discrete)
approach to causal set dynamics. This is the ”sequential growth” paradigm, where the causal set grows element by
element. The quantum dynamics of this growth model is given by a decoherence functional, or equivalently, a vector
measure. I will discuss recent and ongoing work on a ”transfer operator” approach to this dynamics.

===== PAGE 16 =====

STRUCTURES FROM QFT 15
Reiko Toriumi
Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology (OIST) Graduate University, Japan
Title: Renormalisation of enhanced quartic tensor field theories
Tensor field theory is a quantum field theoretic counterpart of tensor models, which are a random geometric
approach to quantum gravity, and can be seen as a higher-dimensional generalisation of matrix model approach
to quantum gravity. In tensor models, usually in some large N limit, graphs called melons dominate and they
exhibit branched polymer (tree) like characteristic, undesirable from quantum gravity point of view. One may
“enhance” certain interactions so that nonmelonic Feynman graphs contribute to the dominant amplitudes, which
consequently may drive us away from branched polymer in the melonic limit. We consider two types of enhanced
models + and × with order d tensor fields ϕ : (U(1)D)d → C and with the enhanced quartic interactions of the form
p2aϕ4 reminiscent of derivative couplings expressed in momentum space. Scrutinising the degree of divergence via
multiscale renormalisation analysis, we study their renormalisability at all orders of perturbation. We furthermore
compute the beta functions of the couplings to understand their renormalisation group flow behavior. At all orders
of perturbation, both enhanced models have a constant wave function renormalisation, therefore no anomalous
dimension. Nevertheless, both models acquire nontrivial radiative corrections for the coupling constants, exhibiting
rather exotic behaviors.
Yannic Vargas
Technische Universit¨ at Graz, Austria
Title: The Steinmann algebra in perturbative quantum field theory and a new basis for Zie
Based on the work of Bogoliubov-Shirkov, Steinmann, Ruelle, and Epstein-Glaser-Stora, William Norledge in-
troduced an algebraic formalism for perturbative quantum field theory (pQFT) using the theory of Joyal’s species.
The approach, which makes use of the notion of Hopf monoid in species developed by Aguiar and Mahajan, allows
to study causal perturbation theory using a homomorphism from the Hopf monoid of decorated set compositions
(operator-valued distributions decorated with local observables) into the Wick algebra of microcausal polynomial
observables.
In this talk we review the construction of the space Zie, a Lie algebra in species closely related to the Steinmann al-
gebra studied in physics. It is generated by the Dynkin elements (introduced in this context by Epstein-Glaser-Stora),
modulo some relations known as the Steinmann relations, which are certain four-term linear relations appearing in
the foundations of axiomatic quantum field theory. For instance, Steinmann relations have been studied in the
context of scattering amplitudes by Caron-Huo et. al., where they appear to be related to cluster algebras. The
Steinmann algebra is then an ordinary graded Lie algebra based on the structure map for the adjoint braid arrange-
ment realization of Zie. We present a new combinatorial basis of Zie, based on the notion of infinitesimal bialgebras,
and some applications to the study of the Steinmann algebra.
Hang Wang
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
Title: Equivariant index theorem on Rn and continuous fields of C ∗-algebras
We shall present an equivariant index theorem on Euclidean spaces using a continuous field of C ∗-algebras, which
can be described globally as some completion of the convolution algebras of Heisenberg groups. This generalizes the
work of Elliott, Natsume and Nest, which is a special case of the algebraic index theorem by Nest-Tsygan. Using our
formula, the equivariant index of the Bott-Dirac operators on Euclidean spaces can be explicitly calculated. This is
joint work with Baiying Ren and Zijing Wang.

===== PAGE 17 =====

16 SPEAKERS
Xin Wang
Shandong University, China
Title: Universal structures in Hodge integrals
In this talk, we will discuss two universal structures in Hodge integrals. One is Virasoro constraints for Hodge
integrals of any target varieties. Another one is partial differential equations for higher genus Gromov-Witten
invariants from Hodge integrals of any target varieties. This talk is partially based on joint work with Felix Janda.
Xiaomeng Xu
Beijing University, China
Title: Yang-Baxter relations, Stokes phenomenon and quantum Riemann-Hilbert-Birkhoff map
The Stokes phenomenon describes the jump of the asymptotics of solutions of a meromorphic ODE at a pole. We
explain how such jump phenomena can be interpreted in terms of various Yang-Baxter type relations. This motivates
the introduction of quantum Stokes matrices at a pole of arbitrary order, that gives rise to a quantization of the
Riemann-Hilbert-Birkhoff map.
Jorge Zanelli
Centro de Estudios Cientificos (CECS), Valdivia, Chile
Title: Chern-Simons paradigm for Gravity
Abstract: Einstein taught us that gravitation -affecting falling apples, orbiting planets, comets and spacecrafts- is
a phenomenon described by a dynamical theory for the geometry of spacetime. He also observed that in a sufficiently
small neighborhood spacetime resembles Minkowski space, so by a suitable choice of reference frame gravity can be
eliminated or faked (Equivalent Principle).
This lecture will review how this construction comes about and why the Chern Simons form plays an exceptional
role among all possible gravitation theories for spacetimes of dimensions D ̸= 4. Special attention will be given to
the case D = 3.
Fabrizio Zanello
Universit¨ at Potsdam, Germany
Title: Conserved currents for the sine-Gordon model, their renormalizability and summability in
pAQFT
We start by presenting the classical theory of the sine-Gordon model. We introduce the so-called B¨ acklund
transformations and describe how one can use them to obtain an infinte number of conservation laws. Then we
formulate the quantum version of the sine-Gordon model in the framework of pAQFT and study the renormalization
of the conserved currents. Building on previous results on the S-matrix of the sine-Gordon model, we show that the
interacting currents are super-renormalizable and that their associated formal power series are in fact summable.
Honglian Zhang
Shanghai University, China
Title: Quantum N-toroidal algebras and extended quantized GIM algebrasof N-fold affinization

===== PAGE 18 =====

STRUCTURES FROM QFT 17
We introduce the notion of quantum N-toroidal algebras as natural generalization of the quantum toroidal algebras
as well as extended quantized GIM algebras of Nfold affinization. We show that the quantum N-toroidal algebras
are quotients of the extended quantized GIM algebras of N-fold affinization, which generalizes a wellknown result of
Berman and Moody for Lie algebras. This talk is based on the joint work with Prof. Y. Gao, N. Jing and L. Xia.
Yuanyuan Zhang
Henan University
Title: Free Rota-Baxter family algebras and free (tri)dendriform family algebras
Algebraic structures may appear in family version, where the operations are replaced by a family of operations
indexed by some set Ω, in general endowed with a semigroup structure. Rota-Baxter family algebra comes from the
momentum scheme in Quantum Field Theory. We mainly introduce the free Rota-Baxter family algebras and free
(tri)dendriform family algebras, then give the relationship between them.
Guodong Zhou
East China Normal University
Title: Minimal models in algebra and operad theory
Minimal models of algebras originated from rational homotopy theory and play an important role in algebra. For
algebraic structures governed by operads, it is also important to seek minimal models, say, homotopy version of them.
For instance, A-infinity algebras are the homotopy version of associative algebras, which can be obtained by Koszul
duality. However, for operated algebras such Rota-Baxter algebras or differential algebras with nonzero weights, the
minimal models remained open. Recently we found a method to produce minimal models for such operated algebras.
This talk is a survey about recent work on this subject.