===== PAGE 1 =====

arXiv:hep-th/9904009v5  28 Jan 2000
CGPG-99/3-4
Quantum causal histories
Fotini Markopoulou∗
Center for Gravitational Physics and Geometry
Department of Physics
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA, USA 16802
March 25, 1999
Abstract
Quantum causal histories are deﬁned to be causal sets with Hi lbert spaces attached
to each event and local unitary evolution operators. The reﬂ exivity, antisymmetry, and
transitivity properties of a causal set are preserved in the quantum history as conditions
on the evolution operators. A quantum causal history in whic h transitivity holds can be
treated as “directed” topological quantum ﬁeld theory. Two examples of such histories
are described.
∗fotini@phys.psu.edu
1

===== PAGE 2 =====

1 Introduction
In general relativity, with compact rather than asymptotic ally ﬂat boundary conditions,
physical observations are made inside the system that they d escribe. In quantum theory,
the observable quantities are meaningful outside the syste m that they refer to. It is very
likely that quantum gravity must be a “quantum mechanical re lativistic theory”. That is,
a theory where the observables can be given as self-adjoint o perators on a Hilbert space but
which are meaningful inside the system that they describe.
A rough description of what such a theory involves is the foll owing. Observations made
inside the system are closely related to causality in the sen se that an inside observer nec-
essarily splits the history of the system into the part that i s in the future, the part that
is in the past, and — assuming ﬁnite speed of propagation of in formation — elsewhere.
We may call such observables “internal observables”, chara cterised by the requirement that
they refer to information that an observer at a point, or a con nected region of spacetime,
may be able to gain about their causal past. In a previous pape r [11], we found that
these observables can be described by functors from the part ially ordered set of events in
the spacetime to the category of sets. Such a functor codes th e relationship between the
causal structure and the information available to an observ er inside the spacetime. This
has non-trivial consequences and, in particular, the obser vables algebra is modiﬁed even at
the classical level. Internal observables satisfy a Heytin g algebra, which is a weak version of
the Boolean algebra of ordinary observables. This is still a distributional algebra. Namely,
for propositions P, Q and R, if P ∨ Q denotes “P or Q”, and P ∧ Q means “P and Q”, then
P ∨ (Q ∧ R) = ( P ∨ Q) ∧ (P ∨ R).
On the other hand, quantum mechanics is linear, and as a resul t of the superposition
principle, quantum mechanical propositions are not distri butive. If P, Q and R are projec-
tion operators, P ∨(Q∧R) is not equal to ( P ∨Q)∧(P ∨R). Having both quantum mechanics
and internal observables in the same theory requires ﬁnding propositions that have a non-
distributive quantum mechanical aspect and a distributive causal aspect. The aim of the
present paper is to deﬁne the histories in which such observa bles may be encountered.
We will, therefore, deﬁne quantum causal histories, which a re histories that are both
quantum mechanical and causal. Assuming that a discrete cau sal ordering (a causal set) is a
suﬃcient description of the fundamental past/future order ing needed to qualify observations
as being inside the system, we ﬁnd that a quantum causal histo ry can be constructed by
attaching ﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert spaces to the events o f the causal set. It is then natural
to consider tensor products of the Hilbert spaces on events t hat are spacelike separated. We
deﬁne quantum histories with local unitary evolution maps b etween such sets of spacelike
separated events. The conditions of reﬂexivity, antisymme try and transitivity that hold for
the causal set have analogs in the quantum history which are c onditions on the evolution
operators. We ﬁnd that transitivity is a strong physical con dition on the evolution operators
and, if imposed, implies that the quantum causal histories a re invariant under directed
coarse graining.
If the the causal set represents the universe, quantum causa l histories constitute a quan-
tum cosmological theory. Its main notable feature is that th ere is a Hilbert space for each
event but not one for the entire universe. Hence, no wavefunc tion of the universe arises.
A consistent intepretation of quantum causal histories and observatons inside the quantum
2

===== PAGE 3 =====

universe can be provided and will appear in a forthcoming pap er [14].
In more detail, the outline of this paper is the following. In section 2 we review causal set
histories and provide a list of deﬁnitions of structures tha t can be found in a causal history
and which are used in the quantum causal histories. In partic ular, we concentrate on acausal
sets, sets of causally unrelated events. In section 3, we int roduce the poset of acausal sets,
equipped with the appropriate ordering relation. The deﬁni tion of quantum causal histories
is based on this poset and is given in section 4. The propertie s of the resulting histories
are discussed in section 5. The ordering of a causal set is reﬂ exive, antisymmetric and
transitive, conditions which are also imposed on the quantu m histories. The consequences
of these properties are analyzed in section 6. In particular , we ﬁnd that transitivity leads
to directed coarse-graining invariance. Two classes of qua ntum causal histories are given
as examples in section 7. Up to this point, the causal histori es require a choice of a causal
set. In section 8, we remove this restriction and provide a su m-over-histories version of
quantum causal evolution. The quantum causal histories pre sented here are consistent, but
not all physically meaningful questions can be asked. There are several possibilities for
generalisations, some of which we outline in the Conclusion s.
2 Causal set histories
A (discrete) causal history is a causal set of events that car ry extra structure. For example,
the causal histories that were examined in [12, 10, 13] had as events vector spaces spanned
by SUq(2) intertwiners. In two dimensions, an exact model of such a causal history has been
proposed by Ambjorn and Loll [1] and its continuum limit prop erties have been investigated
in [1, 2]. The dynamics of a 3-dimensional causal spin networ k history model is addressed
by Borissov and Gupta in [4] 1.
In this section, we review the deﬁnition of a causal set and pr ovide several derivative
deﬁnitions which will be used in the rest of this paper.
A causal set C is a partially ordered set whose elements are interpeted as t he events in
a history (see [3, 16, 15]). We denote the events by p, q, r, . . .. If, say, p precedes q, we write
p ≤ q. The equal option is used when p coincides with q. We write pRq when either p ≤ q
or p ≥ q holds.
The causal relation is reﬂexive, i.e. p ≤ p for any event p. It is also transitive, i.e. if
p ≤ q and q ≤ r, then p ≤ r. To ensure that C has no closed timelike loops, we make the
causal relation antisymmetric, that is, if p ≤ q and q ≤ p, then p = q. Finally, we limit
ourselves to histories with a ﬁnite number of events.
Given a causal set, there are several secondary structures t hat we can construct from it
and which come in useful in this paper. We therefore list them here (see Figures 1 and 2):
• The causal past of some event p is the set of all events r ∈ C with r ≤ p. We denote
the causal past of p by P (p).
• The causal future of p is the set of all events q ∈ C with p ≤ q. We denote it by F (p).
1 For pure causal set theories (with no extra structure on the e vents), we may note recent work by
Rideout and Sorkin who derived a family of stochastic sequen tial growth dynamics for a causal set, with
very interesting consequences about the classical limit of pure causal sets [5]. Further, the dynamics of a
toy model causal set using a suitable quantum measure was pro posed by Criscuolo and Waelbroek in [6].
3

===== PAGE 4 =====

• An acausal set, denoted a, b, c, . . ., is a set of events in C that are all causally unrelated
to each other.
• The acausal set a is a complete past of the event p when every event in the causal
past P (p) of p is related to some event in a. It is not possible to add an event from
(P (p) − a) to a and produce a new acausal set.
• Similarly, an acausal set b is a complete future of p when every event in the causal
future F (p) of p is related to some event in b.
• A maximal antichain in the causal set C is an acausal set A such that every event in
(C − A) is causally related to some event in A.
Similar deﬁnitions as the above of past, future, complete pa st, and complete future for
a single event can be given for acausal sets:
• The causal past of a is P (a) = ⋃
i P (qi) for all qi ∈ a. Similarly, the causal future of
a is F (a) = ⋃
i F (qi) for all qi ∈ a.
• An acausal set a is a complete past of the acausal set b if every event in P (b) is related
to some event in a.
• An acausal set c is a complete future of b if every event in F (b) is related to some
event in c.
Furthermore,
• Two acausal sets a and b are a complete pair when a is a complete past of b and b is
a complete future of a.
• Two acausal sets a and b are a full pair when they are a complete pair and every event
in a is related to every event in b.
• Two acausal sets a and b cross when some of the events in a are in the future of b and
some are in its past.
3 The poset of acausal sets
The set of acausal sets within a given causal set C is a partially ordered set if we deﬁne
the relation a ⪯ b to mean that a is a complete past of b and b is a complete future of a.
Reﬂecting the properties of the underlying causal set, the r elation ⪯ is reﬂexive, transitive
and antisymmetric. Let us call this poset A.
It is on this poset of acausal sets that we will base the quantu m version of the causal
histories. Its properties, therefore, are important const raints on the corresponding quantum
history. The main property of A that characterises the kind of quantum theory we will
obtain in this paper is that, given acausal sets a, b and c, the following holds ( R means
either ⪯ or ⪰):
If aRc, bRc, and a, b do not cross, then aRb. (1)
4

===== PAGE 5 =====

a
b
p
F(p)
P(p)
Figure 1: This is a very small causal history. P (p) is the causal past of the event p while
F (p) is its causal future. The acausal set a is a complete past for p, and b is a complete
future.
a
b
Figure 2: The acausal sets a and b are a complete pair.
5

===== PAGE 6 =====

That is, given some acausal set c ∈ A, all the acausal sets that are related to c are also
related to each other — except if they happen to cross. If a and b are “too close” to each
other they may cross and then cannot be related by ⪯. This means that for the chosen c
there is not a unique complete pair sequence. In selecting on e of the possible sequences we
need to make repeated choices of which of two crossing acausa l sets to keep.
4 Quantum causal histories
We will now construct the quantum version, QA, of the poset A. We will regard an event
q in the causal set as a Planck-scale quantum “event” with a Hil bert space H(q) that stores
its possible states. We require that H(q) is ﬁnite-dimensional, which is consistent with the
requirement that our causal sets be ﬁnite.
Choose an acausal set a = {q1, q2, . . . , qn} in A. Since all qi ∈ a are causally unrelated
to each other, standard quantum mechanics dictates that the Hilbert space of a is
H(a) =
n⨂
i=1
H(qi). (2)
That is, we have a tensor product Hilbert space in QA for each acausal set in A.
When two acausal sets are related, a ⪯ b, there needs to be an evolution operator
between the corresponding Hilbert spaces:
Eab : H(a) − → H(b). (3)
We will impose one more condition on the causal histories tha t will make their present
treatment simpler. We will only consider posets A with the following property:
If a ⪯ b, dim H(a) = dim H(b). (4)
This restriction is particularly convenient since it allow s us to simply regard H(a) and H(b)
as isomorphic and require that Eab is a unitary evolution operator.
The poset of acausal sets A is reﬂexive, transitive and antisymmetric. We would like
to maintain these properties of the causal ordering in the qu antum theory as analogous
conditions on the evolution operators. (In other words, we w ant the quantum causal history
to be a functor from the poset A to the category of Hilbert spaces.) The analogue of
reﬂexivity is the existence of an operator Eaa = 1a : H(a) → H(a) for every acausal set a.
Eaa has to be the identity because any other operator from H(a) to itself would have to be
a new event. Transitivity in A implies that
EbcEab = Eac (5)
in QA. We will return to transitivity and its implications for A and QA in section 6.
At each event q, there is an algebra of observables, the operators on H(q). An observable
ˆOa at a becomes an observable ˆOb at b by
ˆOb = Eab ˆOaE†
ab. (6)
6

===== PAGE 7 =====

This completes the deﬁnition of the causal quantum historie s we are concerned with.
In the next section we discuss the evolution of states which i s allowed in such histories.
Then, in section 6, we will come back to the imposition of tran sitivity on the evolution
operators, a strong condition that dictates the form of the r esulting histories and their
quantum cosmology interpretation.
5 Quantum evolution in QA
In this section we discuss the consequences of the deﬁnition s of quantum histories given
above.
5.1 Products of complete pair sequences
Evolution maps between complete pairs that are themselves c ausally unrelated to each other
may be composed in the standard way, like tensors. That is, co nsider complete pairs a ⪯ b
and c ⪯ d, with a and b unrelated to c or d. Then construct the acausal sets a ∪ c and
b ∪ d, which form a new complete pair: ( a ∪ c) ⪯ (b ∪ d). The evolution operator on the
composites,
E(a∪ c)(b∪ d) : H(a) ⊗ H(c) − → H(b) ⊗ H(d), (7)
is the product of the operators on the two pairs,
E(a∪ c)(b∪ d) = Eab ⊗ Ecd. (8)
5.2 Projection operators
The causal structure of A means that a projection operator on H(a) propagates to the
future of a in the following way. A projection operator
Pa : H(a) → V (a) (9)
that reduces H(a) to a subspace V (a), can be extended to a larger acausal set a ∪ c. On
H(a) ⊗ H(c), it is the new projection operator
Pa∪ c = Pa ⊗ 1c : H(a) ⊗ H(c) − → V (a) ⊗ H(c). (10)
By using the evolution operator E(a∪ c)(b∪ d) = Eab ⊗ Ecd on the enlarged projection operator
we obtain a projection operator Pb ⊗ 1d on the future acausal set b ∪ d.
5.3 Evolution in A can be independent of C
Consider a complete pair a ⪯ b in which a = a1 ∪ a2 and b = b1 ∪ b2. The corresponding
Hilbert spaces are
H(a) = H(a1) ⊗ H(a2) and H(b) = H(b1) ⊗ H(b2), (11)
and Eab is the evolution operator that corresponds to the causal rel ation a ⪯ b.
7

===== PAGE 8 =====

Choose some state |ψ⟩ ∈ H(a1) by acting on H(a1) with the projection operator |ψ⟩⟨ψ|.
This implies that, in H(a), we have chosen the state |ψ⟩ ⊗ |ψa2 ⟩, for some |ψa2 ⟩ ∈ H(a2),
using the projection operator ( |ψ⟩⟨ψ|) ⊗ 1a2 . We can use Eab on this state to obtain the
state
|ψb⟩ = Eab (|ψ⟩ ⊗ |ψa2⟩) (12)
in H(b).
If, for any reason, we need to restrict our attention to b2, we can trace over b1 to ﬁnd
that the original state |ψ⟩ ∈ H(a2) gives rise to the density matrix:
ρψ(b2) = Tr b1|ψb⟩⟨ψb∥ (13)
= Tr b1
[
Eab (|ψ⟩⟨ψ| ⊗1a2) E†
ab
]
. (14)
At this point, the following question arises. What if a1 is not in the causal past of b2 and,
for example, we have these causal relations:
aa
b
1 2
1 2b
(15)
Does the evolution we deﬁned on QA violate causality in the underlying causal set C?
This question illuminates several features of the quantum c ausal histories. The very ﬁrst
thing to note is that we get the same acausal poset A for many diﬀerent causal sets. The
operator Eab refers to A and does not distiguish the diﬀerent possible underlying ca usal
sets.
There is a simple solution to the above apparent embarassmen t. Instead of promoting
the events of the causal set to Hilbert spaces, we may attach t he Hilbert spaces to the edges,
and the evolution operators to the events. An event in the cau sal set, then, becomes an
evolution operator from the tensor product of the Hilbert sp aces on the edges ingoing to
that event, to the tensor product of the outgoing ones. Since the set of ingoing and the set
of outgoing edges to the same event are a full pair (i.e. a comp lete pair in which all events
in the past acausal set are related to all the events in the fut ure one), the above problem
will not arise. Conceptually, this solution agrees with the intuition that events in the causal
set represent change, and, therefore, in the quantum case th ey should be represented as
operators. In section 7.2, we discuss the example of quantum causal histories with the
Hilbert spaces on the edges for trivalent causal sets.
5.4 Propagation by a density matrix requires a complete pair
According to (14), given a state |ψ⟩ ∈ H(a), we can obtain the density matrix ρψ(b2) for
the acausal set b2 in the future of a. This uses the fact that b2 is a subset of an acausal set
b that forms a complete pair with a.
8

===== PAGE 9 =====

Consider this conﬁguration:
21
p
ppp
p
4
3p
5
a
w
76
p
(16)
The initial acausal set is a = {p1, p2}. The acausal set w = {p3, p4} is in the future of a.
Given |ψ⟩ ∈ H(a), can we obtain a density matrix on H(w)? The answer is no, since there
is no acausal set that contains w and is maximal in the future of a. (The problem is the
p2 ≤ p7 relation.)
There are, therefore, acausal sets in the future of a which cannot be reached by the
evolution map E.
6 Directed coarse-graining
The main idea in this paper is that the quantum version of some causal history is a collection
of Hilbert spaces connected by evolution operators that res pect the structure of the poset
A we started with. For this reason, in section 4, we imposed reﬂ exivity, transitivity and
antisymmetry to the operators Eab.
Transitivity is a strong condition on the quantum history. O ne should keep in mind that
it was ﬁrst imposed on causal sets because it holds for the cau sal structure of Lorentzian
spacetimes. Signiﬁcantly, it does not just encode properti es of the ordering of events but
also the fact that a Lorentzian manifold is a point set . In general relativity, an event is a
point and this has been imported in the causal set approach.
To analyse this a little further, let us introduce a notation that indicates when two
events p and q are related by a shortest causal relation, i.e., no other eve nt occurs after p
and before q. This is the covering relation:
• The event q covers p if p ≤ q and there is no other event r with p ≤ r ≤ q.
We denote this by p → q.
The following are worth noting. For a ﬁnite causal set, trans itivity means that the order
relation determines, and is determined by, the covering rel ation, since p ≤ q is equivalent to
a ﬁnite sequence of covering relations p = p1 → p2 . . . → pn = q. On the other hand, in the
continuum (for example the real line R) there are no pairs p, q such that p → q [7]. Hence,
in a continuum spacetime, it is simply not meaningful to cons ider an ordering that is not
transitive. Non-transitive ordering requires distinguis hing between the covering relations
and the resulting transitive ones. This distinction is not p ossible in the continuum case.
In short, for events that are points, it is sensible to expect that if p leads to q and q to r,
then r is in the future of p. If, however, the events were (for example) spacetime regio ns of
some ﬁnite volume, with overlaps, then it is unclear whether transitivity would hold. (See
9

===== PAGE 10 =====

also section 2.4 in [8].) In the causal histories we consider here, an event is a Hilbert space.
It is, therefore, an open question whether it is sensible to i mpose reﬂexivity, transitivity
and antisymmetry on the ordering of the Hilbert spaces. We ch oose to ﬁrst impose them,
then ﬁnd what the implications are, and if they are unphysica l, go back and check which of
the three conditions should not be maintained in a quantum ca usal ordering.
On the positive side, there is a very interesting advantage t o maintaining transitivity.
Using (5), we have the beneﬁt of a directed coarse-graining invariance of the quantum
history. For example, if we are handed
p
ppp
p p
pp
1
6 7
8 9
2
3 4 5
p
(17)
and need to go from H(p1) ⊗ H(p2) to H(p3) ⊗ H(p4) ⊗ H(p5), we can reduce it to
p p p
p
5
21
3 4
p
. (18)
Clearly, several initial graphs will give the same coarse-g rained graph. We return to this in
section 8.
It is very interesting to note that the coarse-graining impl ied by transitivity can be used
to improve the propagation of density matrices that we discu ssed in section 5.4. We can
coarse-grain the causal set depicted in (16) by considering the events p3, p4, p5, p6, p7 to be
the acausal set ¯w. This is a coarse-graining in the sense that we ignore any cau sal relations
between these events. We then obtain:
p
5p
a 21p
6
w 3p 4
p7
w p
p
. (19)
In this causal set, a and ¯w are a complete pair. It is then possible to use an evolution
operator Ea ¯w to take the state |ψ⟩ ∈ H(a) to a state in H( ¯w) and then trace over ( ¯w − w)
to obtain a density matrix on H(w).
10

===== PAGE 11 =====

7 Examples
In this section, we provide two examples of the quantum causa l histories we deﬁned in
section 4.
7.1 Discrete Newtonian evolution
A discrete Newtonian history is a universe with a preferred t ime and foliation. It is repre-
sented by a poset A which is a single complete pair sequence:
. . . an − → an+1 − → an+2 . . . . (20)
The corresponding quantum history is then
. . . Hn − → Hn+1 − → Hn+2 . . . . (21)
with all the Hilbert spaces isomorphic to each other.
We can denote by E the evolution operator from Hn to Hn+1. Evolution from Hn to
Hm is then given by
Enm = Em− n. (22)
We may compare this universe to the standard one in quantum th eory. There, there is
a single Hilbert space for the entire universe and evolution is given by the unitary operator
eiHδt . In the above, there is a sequence of identical and ﬁnite-dim ensional Hilbert spaces.
Since evolution is by discrete steps, we may set δt = 1. Then E = eiH , for some hermitian
operator H and Enm = ei(m− n)H .
7.2 A planar trivalent graph with Hilbert spaces on the edges
This example is a history with multiﬁngered time [10]. It is a planar trivalent graph with
ﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert spaces living on its edges. Trivalent means either two ingoing and
one outgoing edges at a node, or two outgoing and one ingoing. We exclude nodes with no
ingoing or no outgoing edges.
From a given planar trivalent causal set C, we can obtain what we will call its edge-set,
EC . This is a new graph which has the covering relations of C (the edges, not including
any transitive ones) as its nodes. The covering relations in C are also ordered and these
relations are the edges in EC . Figure 3 shows an example of a causal set and its edge-set.
We now take the poset A of EC and construct a quantum history from it by assigning
Hilbert spaces to the nodes of EC . The very interesting property of EC is that it can be
decomposed into pieces, generating evolution moves that ta ke two events to one, or split
one event into two. That is, EC can be decomposed to these two full pairs:
H(e ) H(e ) H(e )
H(e )
2
541
63
H(e ) H(e )
. (23)
11

===== PAGE 12 =====

(This is generally the case, not only for trivalent graphs.) Such a decomposition is not
possible in some general C and therefore, in view of the problem we encountered in 5.3
above, EC provides an advantage over C.
To be able to employ unitary evolution operators, we need dim H(e1) = dim H(e2) +
dim H(e3) and dim H(e4) + dim H(e5) = dim H(e6). One can check that this can be done
consistently for all the events in the causal set.
Although C is trivalent, the nodes of EC have valence 2,3, or 4. The list of possible edges
in C and the corresponding nodes in EC is:
(24)
There is a substantial interpretational diﬀerence between Hilbert spaces on the (cover-
ing) causal relations and on the events. A state space on the e dge p ≤ q is most naturally
interpeted as “the state space of p as seen by q”. If there are two edges coming out of p,
to q and r, then there are two Hilbert spaces in EC , interpeted as the Hilbert space of p
as seen by q and the Hilbert space of p as seen by r. On the other hand, a Hilbert space
placed on the event p is absolute, in the sense that is independent of who is observ ing it.
12

===== PAGE 13 =====

Figure 3: A causal set and its edge-set.
8 Summing over histories
The quantum causal histories we discussed in this paper requ ire a ﬁxed poset A. This is
also necessary in the treatment of observers in a classical c ausal set universe in [11]. Since
there is no physical reason that some causal set should be pre ferred over all others, this
restriction is unappealing. In this section we outline a “su m-over-histories” version of the
evolution in section 4, which also applies to [11] and can be u sed in any further work on
quantum observers inside the universe.
An acausal set is a set of points. We have considered causal se ts where all events have
at least one ingoing and one outgoing edge. Then, that a, b are a complete pair a ⪯ b means
that there is a directed graph with the set a as its domain and the set b as its codomain.
Let us denote this graph by γ(a, b). A graph with b as its codomain and one with b as its
domain may be composed.
When A is given, there is one known graph γ(a, b) connecting a and b. If A is not ﬁxed,
we can sum over all graphs that we can ﬁt between a and b (that have a ﬁnite number of
nodes). This leads to a sum-over-histories version of the ev olution in section 4.
Let us call Eγ
ab the evolution operator (as in equation (3)) when the underly ing graph is
γ(a, b). The transition amplitude from a state |ψa⟩ ∈ H(a) to a state |ψb⟩ ∈ H(b) for this
particular graph is
Aγ = ⟨ψb|Eγ
ab|ψa⟩. (25)
If the graph is not ﬁxed, we may sum over all the possible ones:
Aab =
∑
γ
⟨ψb|Eγ
ab|ψa⟩. (26)
Now note that transitivity deﬁnes equivalence classes of gr aphs between given acausal
sets. Here is an example of a series of graphs that, by transit ivity, have the same causal
relations as far as a and b are concerned. Speciﬁcally, p1, p2, p3 ≤ p4 and p3 ≤ p4, p5 in all
13

===== PAGE 14 =====

of these graphs:
pp
p p1
54
3 2p
... (27)
All of the above correspond to the same evolution operator in (26).
It is intriguing to compare this to the triangulation invari ance of topological quantum
ﬁeld theory. Transitivity can be intepreted as a directed triangulation invariance. We will
return to this in future work.
9 Conclusions
We saw that it is possible to promote a causal set to a quantum o ne by taking the events to
be ﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert spaces. It is natural to consi der tensor products of the Hilbert
spaces on events that are spacelike separated. This led us to replace the causal set by the
poset of acausal sets A. We deﬁned quantum histories with local unitary evolution m aps
between complete pairs in A.2
We explored several of the features of these causal historie s. A property of A is that
it splits into distinct sequences of complete pairs. Conseq uently, this places restrictions
on which Hilbert spaces can be reached from a given one. The co nditions of reﬂexivity,
antisymmetry and transitivity that hold for A were imposed on the quantum history as
conditions on the evolution operators. The most interestin g consequences were from tran-
sitivity, which gave rise to invariance under directed coar se-graining. This needs further
investigation, since the physical assumption behind trans itivity is pointlike events. It will
be interesting to consider events which are extended object s and ﬁnd what ordering is
suitable in this case.
We were able to tensor together the Hilbert spaces for two aca usal sets when they are
spacelike separated and have no events in common. However, i t is natural to consider cases
where an acausal set is a subset of a larger one. It appears tha t, if we need to use acausal
sets, we should enrich A with the inclusion relation, that is, use a poset with two ordering
relations, causal ordering and spacelike inclusion. While this is straightforward in the plain
causal set case, it becomes tricky in the quantum histories. For example, we may start from
the acausal sets a = {q1, q2} and a′ = {q1, q2, q3}. In the poset A we have a ⊂ a′. In QA, the
corresponding state spaces are H(a) = H(q1) ⊗ H(q2) and H(a′) = H(q1) ⊗ H(q2) ⊗ H(q3).
However, there is no natural way in which H(a) is a subspace of H(a′). That is, the set
inclusion relation is not directly preserved in the quantum theory.
In the quantum histories we discussed, we restricted the pas t and future Hilbert spaces
to have the same dimension. This is the simplest case and need s to be generalised. A
related issue is the properties of the individual Hilbert sp aces. For example, if we employ
2Discrete evolution by unitary operators is also considered by P. Zizzi, in work to appear.
14

===== PAGE 15 =====

the causal spin network models of [13], the evolution operat ors should respect the SU (2)
invariance of the state spaces. More generally, a discrete q uantum ﬁeld theory toy model
can be constructed by inserting matter ﬁeld algebras on the e vents. This will be addressed
in future work.
Finally, we set up QA having in mind a functor from a poset to Hilbert spaces, takin g
the elements and arrows of the poset into Hilbert spaces and o perators which preserve the
properties of the original poset, i.e. reﬂexivity, antisym metry and transitivity. It is also
possible to use graphs between sets of events (rather than a ﬁ xed causal set), as outlined
in section 8. In this case, the quantum causal histories beco me similar to topological
quantum ﬁeld theory except, importantly, they are directed graphs (or triangulations).
The coarse-graining invariance relations can be calculate d for given ﬁxed valence of the
covering relations.
On the interpretational side, the main thing to note is that t he causal history is a
collection of Hilbert spaces which itself is not a Hilbert sp ace. According to quantum
theory, we can take tensor products of events that are not cau sally related. We cannot, for
example, take the tensor product of all the Hilbert spaces in the history to be the Hilbert
space of the entire history. 3 As a result, the causal quantum cosmology is not described in
terms of a wavefunction of the universe. Individual events ( or observers on the events) can
have states and wavefunctions but the entire universe does n ot. Further discussion of the
interpretation of the quantum causal histories will appear in [14].
Acknowledgment
I am grateful to Chris Isham for his comments on transitivity and the pointlike structure of
spacetime. This paper has beneﬁted from discussions with Le e Smolin on quantum theory
and the interpetation of such histories as quantum cosmolog ies. I am also grateful to Sameer
Gupta and Eli Hawkins for discussions on causal histories.
This work was supported by NSF grants PHY/9514240 and PHY/94 23950 to the Penn-
sylvania State University and a gift from the Jesse Phillips Foundation.
3Taking tensor products of all Hilbert spaces in the history i s, however, exactly what is done in the
consistent histories approach of Isham [9].
15

===== PAGE 16 =====

References
[1] Ambjorn J and Loll R, 1998, “Non-perturbative Lorentzia n Quantum Gravity, Causality and
Topology Change” Nucl Phys B536 407.
[2] Ambjorn J, Nielsen JL, Rolf J and Loll R, 1998, “Euclidean and Lorentzian Quantum Gravity
- Lessons from Two Dimensions”, Chaos Solitons Fractals 10, 177 (hep-th/9806241).
[3] Bombelli L, Lee J, Meyer D and R, 1987, “Space-time as a cau sal set”, Phys Rev Lett 59 521.
[4] Borissov R and Gupta S, 1998, “Propagating spin modes in c anonical quantum gravity”,
Phys.Rev. D60, 024002 (gr-qc/9810024).
[5] D P Rideout and R D Sorkin, 1999, “A Classical Sequential G rowth Dynamics for Causal Sets”,
gr-qc/9904062.
[6] Criscuolo A and Waelbroeck H, 1998, “Causal Set Dynamics : A Toy Model”, Class.Quant.Grav.
16, 1817 (gr-qc/9811088).
[7] B.A. Davey and H.A. Priestley, “Introduction to Lattice s and Order”, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1992.
[8] Isham C J, 1994, “ Quantum Logic and the Histories Approac h to Quantum Theory”, J Math
Phys 35 2157.
[9] Isham C J, 1997, “Topos Theory and Consistent Histories: The Internal Logic of the Set of all
Consistent Sets”, Int J Theor Phys 36 785.
[10] Markopoulou F, 1997, “Dual formulation of spin network evolution”, gr-qc/9704013.
[11] Markopoulou F, 1998, “The internal logic of causal sets : What the universe looks like from the
inside”, Commun.Math.Phys, to appear.
[12] Markopoulou F and Smolin L, 1997, “Causal evolution of s pin networks”, Nucl Phys B508
409.
[13] Markopoulou F and Smolin L, 1998, “Quantum geometry wit h intrinsic local causality”, Phys
Rev D 58, 084032.
[14] Markopoulou F and Smolin L, 1999, “Causal quantum cosmo logy”, to appear.
[15] Meyer D A, 1988, The Dimension of Causal Sets , PhD Thesis, Massachussets Institute of
Technology.
[16] Sorkin R, 1990, “Space-time and causal sets” in Proc. of SILARG VII Conf., Cocoyoc, Mexico.
16