===== PAGE 1 =====

arXiv:hep-th/0302111v3  4 Aug 2003
hep-th/0302111
SISSA 16/2003/MP
CGPG-03/5-5
Evolution in Quantum Causal Histories
Eli Hawkins∗
Scuola Internazionale Superiore di Studi Avanzati,
Via Beirut 4, I-34014, Trieste, Italy
Fotini Markopoulou†
Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics,
35 King Street North, Waterloo, Ontario N2J 2W9, Canada, and
Department of Physics, University of Waterloo,
Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3G1, Canada
Hanno Sahlmann‡
Center for Gravitational Physics and Geometry ,
The Pennsylvania State University ,
University Park, PA 16802-6300, USA
Abstract
We provide a precise deﬁnition and analysis of quantum causal histories
(QCH’s). A QCH consists of a discrete, locally ﬁnite, causal p re-spacetime
with matrix algebras encoding the quantum structure at each event. The evo-
lution of quantum states and observables is described by com pletely positive
maps between the algebras at causally related events. We sho w that this local
description of evolution is sufﬁcient and that unitary evolu tion can be recov-
ered wherever it should actually be expected. This formalis m may describe a
quantum cosmology without an assumption of global hyperbol icity; it is thus
more general than the Wheeler-De Witt approach. The structu re of a QCH
is also closely related to quantum information theory and al gebraic quantum
ﬁeld theory on a causal set.
∗Email address: hawkins@sissa.it
†Email address: fotini@perimeterinstitute.ca
‡Email address: hanno@gravity .psu.edu
1

===== PAGE 2 =====

1 Introduction
The quest for a quantum theory of gravity is now several decad es old and has
been studied with approaches ranging from string theory and non-commutative
geometry to loop quantum gravity , spin foams, and discrete m odels of Planck-
scale spacetime. Most of these take different interpretati ons of what a quantum
theory of gravity should achieve, but with one thing in commo n: that it should be
some merger of general relativity and quantum theory . The ﬁn al goal has not yet
been achieved, but all these approaches have brought to us ne w understandings
of the problem.
We come to the motivation for this paper by putting together a consistent list of
features, selectively chosen from among the various indications of what a quantum
theory of gravity may be. Such a list is by no means unique, but we will ﬁnd that it
is fruitful; it leads to a new notion of quantum cosmology and a new formulation
of evolution in a Planck-scale theory .
Our list is the following: 1) At energies close to the Planck s cale, the description
of spacetime as a continuous, 3 + 1-dimensional manifold breaks down; this is the
usual idea for regularization of quantum ﬁeld theory . 2) Causality is still present in
Planck-scale geometry . 3) Quantum theory is valid in Planck -scale physics. 4) In a
fundamental theory of the universe, there should be a ﬁnite n umber of degrees of
freedom in any ﬁnite region of the universe; this is supported by black hole entropy
calculations from both string theory and loop quantum gravi ty , and Bekenstein’s
physical arguments. 5) The theory should be background inde pendent.
Quantum causal histories (QCH) were introduced in [14] as a f ormalism for
quantum cosmology that realizes most of the above assumptio ns. The idea is to
use a causal set (locally ﬁnite, partially ordered set) as th e description of the causal
structure of the universe. Quantum theory is present throug h the assignment of
ﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert spaces to these events. They can be regarded as repre-
senting the fundamental building blocks of the universe at t he Planck scale. The
composite Hilbert space for two spacelike separated events is the tensor product
of the individual Hilbert spaces. Evolution is implemented by unitary operators
between complete pairs, special cases of sets of spacelike s eparated events which
can be understood as isolated Planck-scale systems, or the d iscrete equivalent of
successive Cauchy surfaces of an isolated component of spac etime.
Clearly , this implements the ﬁrst four properties above. Th e ﬁfth is more difﬁ-
cult (and will not be resolved here). Because it involves a ﬁx ed causal structure, a
QCH is not a completely background independent description . Nevertheless, all
other degrees of freedom are quantum, and with the algebraic treatment presented
here this may be a step toward a truly background independent model.
Quantum causal histories can also describe causal spin foam models (see the
review [19]). These are pre-spacetime models; that is, grav ity and the familiar
spacetime manifold are meant to be derived as the low-energy continuum approx-
2

===== PAGE 3 =====

imation of such models. A particular example of a QCH is a caus al spin network
[13, 16] and this was a principal motivation for the introduc tion of QCH’s. A vari-
ation on the idea of a QCH was applied to a spin foam model in [11 ].
However, as was already discussed in [14], the deﬁnition of Q CH there does
not adequately take into account the causal structure of the underlying causal set.
In particular, the unitary evolution operators in that deﬁn ition are indifferent to
the individual relations interpolating between the ingoin g and outgoing events.
The same unitary evolution is admitted regardless of these i ndividual relations.
This means that the quantum evolution does not respect the un derlying causal
structure. Further, given two related events, there might n ot be a complete pair
containing them, in which case we cannot say anything about t he relation between
states at the two events. These issues are discussed in detai l in the next section.
In this paper we address all of the above issues by giving a rev ised deﬁnition
for a quantum causal history in which the causal structure is faithfully reﬂected
in the quantum causal history . We ﬁnd that doing so requires w orking with alge-
bras of operators, instead of Hilbert spaces, on the events. Following the above
idea of local ﬁniteness at the fundamental level, these alge bras are simple matrix
C∗-algebras. We ﬁnd that a causal relation in the causal set cor responds to a com-
pletely positive map in the QCH. This is not surprising, sinc e this is the most gen-
eral kind of physical transformation allowed by quantum the ory . We also show
that these maps can be regarded as fundamental and the unitar y operators of the
original deﬁnition can be reconstructed from them with no lo ss of information.
As a quantum cosmology , a QCH is most naturally interpreted as describing the
universe as a very large collection of open quantum mechanic al building blocks.
Unitary evolution arises only where there is a complete pair , which is the discrete
analogue of an isolated system. This is much more general tha n a Wheeler-De Witt
type of quantum cosmology . That “canonical” approach to qua ntum gravity is
strongly dependent on global hyperbolicity and Cauchy surf aces. In contrast,
QCH’s allow that hyperbolicity may dissolve in the quantum f oam. This seems
more likely to describe the apparent non-unitarity of black hole evaporation than
does the more traditional approach. A QCH is also especially suited for describ-
ing the evolution of localized quantities without having to refer to a path integral
or Hamiltonian constraint for the entire universe. Aside fr om cosmology , we see
with hindsight that there are several further ways of interp reting a QCH; we dis-
cuss these in Section 6 and the conclusions.
Concretely , the present paper is an in-depth analysis of QCH ’s and opens up
several new possibilities for the concrete implementation of models of that type.
For example, it is interesting, and potentially practical, that evolution in a QCH
is almost identical to the quantum information theoretic de scription of quantum
noise. Also, the continuous time analogue of the completely positive evolution in
a QCH, is a master equation, already extensively used in quan tum cosmology . We
comment on these connections in the conclusions.
3

===== PAGE 4 =====

The outline of this paper is as follows. In Section 2, we revie w the original
deﬁnition of quantum causal histories given in [14], as well as the deﬁnitions of
the basic structures in a causal set that are needed for the re st of the paper. One
of our main results is that the relations in a causal set corre spond to completely
positive maps in the QCH. In order to give the reader some intu ition about these
maps before they have to face the precise deﬁnition of a QCH an d the following
proof that unitary evolution can be reconstructed from them, we give in Section 3 a
basic introduction to completely positive maps and a simple example. Section 5 is
the revised, complete deﬁnition of a QCH. Although this was n ot a motivation for
this work, this deﬁnition can be understood as an algebraic q uantum ﬁeld theory
on a causal set, with the operator algebras being simple matr ix C ∗-algebras. We
explain this in Section 6. In Section 7, we show that nothing is lost in going from the
unitary operators of the original deﬁnition to the complete ly positive maps, since
the former can be reconstructed from the latter, up to irrele vant phase factors. We
discuss the interpretation of our results and future direct ions in the conclusions.
2 Review of Quantum Causal Histories
In this section we review quantum causal histories. They wer e deﬁned in [14] as a
general formalism for causal spin foams in quantum gravity [ 16, 13, 8] 1.
An important and distinguishing feature of the geometry of s pacetime (as op-
posed to space) is causal structure. If a spacetime is time-o rientable and has no
closed timelike curves, then its causal structure can be com pletely described as a
partial order relation on the events (points) of the spaceti me. The deﬁnition of the
relation is that x ≤ y (“x precedes y”) if there exists a future-directed non-spacelike
curve from x to y. This relation is transitive, i.e., if x ≤ y and y ≤ z then x ≤ z,
because future-directed curves can be concatenated. The as sumption that there ex-
ist no closed timelike curves means precisely that x ≤ y and y ≤ x if and only if
x = y. These are the deﬁning properties of a partial order relation.
We are concerned here with a discrete analogue of a smooth spacetime. A causal
set C is a locally ﬁnite, partially ordered set. That is, for any tw o events x, y ∈ C,
there exist (at most) ﬁnitely many events z ∈ C such that x ≤ z ≤ y.
If either x ≤ y or y ≤ x, then we say that the events x and y are related. If two
events are not related, then we say that they are spacelike separated and write x ∼ y.
An acausal set is a subset ξ ⊂ C such that all events in ξ are spacelike separated
to one another, i.e., x, y ∈ ξ =⇒ x ∼ y. Acausal sets play the role of spacelike
hypersurfaces in causal sets.
A causal set can usefully represented by the (directed) grap h of elementary
relations (Fig. 1). The set of vertices is simply C. There is an edge x → y if x ≤ y
1W e will not discuss speciﬁc spin foam models in the present article. For reviews and discussion
of spin foams, see [1, 18, 15].
4

===== PAGE 5 =====

but there does not exist any z ∈ C such that x ≤ z ≤ y. There is a simple analogue
of a future-directed non-spacelike curve in a causal set. A future-directed path is
a directed path through the graph, that is, a sequence of even ts such that there
exists an edge from each event to the next. A future-directed path is future (past)
inextendible if there exists no event in C which is in the future (past) of the entire
path. Note that this graph generates the partial ordering: x ≤ y if and only if there
exists a future directed path from x to y.
From this, we can deﬁne complete future and past 2. An acausal set ξ is a com-
plete future of an event x if ξ intersects any future-inextendible future-directed path
that starts at x. Similarly , an acausal set ξ is a complete past of an event x if ξ inter-
sects any past-inextendible future-directed path that end s at x.
In order to describe a local quantum structure on our causal s et, we would like
a (ﬁnite-dimensional) Hilbert space H(x) for every event x ∈ C. For two spacelike
separated events x ∼ y ∈ C, the composite state space for {x, y} is H({x, y}) =
H(x) ⊗ H(y). More generally , for any acausal set ξ ⊆ C, H(ξ) = ⨂
x∈ ξ H(x).
In quantum mechanics, time evolution is unitary evolution between the Hilbert
spaces at different times. When should we expect unitary maps between the Hilbert
spaces for different acausal sets ξ, ζ ∈ C? Unitarity can be interpreted as meaning
that no information is lost or added. We can only expect that n o information is
lost in evolving from ξ to ζ if ζ is a complete future of ξ; otherwise, information
coming from ξ might “miss” ζ. Likewise, we can only expect a state at ζ to be
completely determined by one at ξ if ξ is a complete past of ζ. When both of these
conditions are satisﬁed — ξ is a complete past of ζ and ζ is a complete future of ξ
— we call ξ and ζ a complete pair and write ξ ⪯ ζ. We should expect a unitary
map H(ξ) → H(ζ) if and only if ξ ⪯ ζ. One can think of a complete pair as suc-
cessive Cauchy surfaces of an isolated component of spaceti me, or of all spacetime
(see Fig. 1).
This leads to the deﬁnition of a quantum causal history given in [14]. It consists
of a causal set C, a ﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert space H(x) for every x ∈ C, and a
unitary map u(ξ, ζ) : H(ξ) → H(ζ) for any complete pair ξ ⪯ ζ, such that for
ξ ⪯ υ ⪯ ζ,
u(υ, ζ)u(ξ, υ) = u(ξ, ζ).
With this deﬁnition, the unitary maps on the complete pairs t ell us very little
about the causal relations between the two acausal sets. The re can be many con-
ﬁgurations of the interpolating causal relations in a compl ete pair, for example:
2These deﬁnitions are more restrictive than those given in pr evious papers.
5

===== PAGE 6 =====

Figure 1: Two examples of complete pairs in a causal set.
The rules of a quantum causal history tell us that there is a un itary map u(ξ, ζ) :
H(ξ) → H(ζ), but not how it should depend on the interpolating causal rel ations.
This is insufﬁcient. Consider for example the complete pair :
If we start with an unentangled pure state |Ψx ⊗ Ψy⟩ ∈ H(ξ) = H(x) ⊗ H(y), then
this will evolve to |Ψ ′⟩ := u(ξ, ζ)|Ψx ⊗ Ψy⟩ ∈ H(ζ). The state at z is described by a
density matrix, ρz = trw |Ψ ′⟩⟨Ψ ′|. With this causal structure, the state at z should be
completely determined by that at y. In other words ρz should be independent of
|Ψx⟩. However, with the above deﬁnition of a quantum causal histo ry , there is no
restriction on u(ξ, ζ) that would prevent ρz from depending upon |Ψx⟩.
Another problem with this deﬁnition is the reliance on compl ete pairs. Given
two related events x ≤ y, there may not exist a complete pair containing these
events. If so, with this deﬁnition of a quantum causal histor y , we do not know
anything about the relation between states at x and y. There should be some rela-
tion, and the concept of quantum causal history must be reﬁne d to provide this.
In this paper we address all of the above issues by giving a rev ised deﬁnition of
a quantum causal history in which the causal structure of C is faithfully reﬂected
in the quantum causal history . We will deﬁne the QCH as an assi gnment of com-
pletely positive maps to pairs of causally related events. T hese maps relate the
local observables at the causally related events. In the nex t section we introduce
6

===== PAGE 7 =====

E
Figure 2: A system in a mixed state ρ is coupled to some environment, ρE . The joint
system undergoes unitary evolution U. From the output, ϕ(ρ) is extracted, a sys-
tem in a new mixed state which may or may not have the same dimen sionality as
the original system. The transformation ϕ is a linear, trace-preserving, completely
positive map.
the deﬁnition of a completely positive map on open quantum me chanical systems,
in order to provide some intuition for the evolution in QCH be fore giving the new
deﬁnition and results in Sections 5 and 7.
3 Completely Positive Maps
An ordinary quantum mechanical system may be isolated, or it may be coupled
to some environment. The states of the system can be describe d with density ma-
trices and the most general evolution that quantum mechanic s allows for such a
system is a linear, trace-preserving, completely positive (CP) map. In this section
we deﬁne CP maps and discuss their physical interpretation.
Consider a system S in some mixed state given by ρ, a density matrix on its
Hilbert space. Let S interact with an environment E, also in a mixed state ρE . The
evolution of the joint system is given by a unitary operator U. The process could
be such that it is not feasible to extract the system S again, but instead we extract
S ′, which has a density matrix ρ ′. See Fig.2. The transformation from ρ to ρ ′ is
given by a map
ϕ : ρ → ρ ′
of the form
ϕ(ρ) = trenv [U(ρ ⊗ ρE )U∗] .
Such generic transformations from a quantum system to another are maps from
the set of density matrices on S to the set of density matrices on S ′ that satisfy the
following conditions:
Linear on the set of density matrices: a probabilistic mixture of inputs leads to a
probabilistic mixture of outputs, i.e., for probabilities {pi},
ϕ
( ∑
i
piρi
)
=
∑
i
piϕ(ρi).
7

===== PAGE 8 =====

T race-preserving: tr(ϕ(ρ)) = tr(ρ) = 1. This simply means that the normal-
ization is preserved for any density matrix. The total proba bility for anything to
happen is, and remains, 1.
Positive: Probabilities are never negative, and so a density matrix ha s to be a
positive operator (i.e., self-adjoint with only non-negat ive eigenvalues) in order to
describe a physical system. This is preserved by ϕ: if ρ is positive, then ϕ(ρ) is
also positive. Note that this implies that ϕ(a∗) = ϕ(a)∗ for any matrix a.
Completely positive: It turns out that positivity is not enough for ϕ to describe a
physical process. Suppose that we couple the system S to another system E that has
trivial dynamics, 1E . For all such trivial extensions, 1E ⊗ ϕ should also be positive.
This is the condition of complete positivity . Complete posi tivity ensures that the
evolution of S is extendible in a trivial way to a physical evolution in a lar ger
system E ∪ S. It is useful because it covers the case where S is initially entangled
with some distant isolated system 3.
A completely positive map on density matrices is equivalent to a completely
positive map of observable operators in the opposite direct ion (in this case, back-
wards in time). A trace-preserving CP map of density matrice s is dual to a unital 4
CP map of observables. The most general setting for complete ly positive maps is
between C∗-algebras (see [10]). In that context, there are many import ant tools for
working with CP maps. In particular, the Stinespring constr uction shows that any
unital CP map from a C ∗-algebra to the algebra of bounded operators on a Hilbert
space can be written in a universal form, as a representation of the C ∗-algebra on a
larger Hilbert space, composed with the projection onto the smaller Hilbert space.
4 From Unitary to Completely Positive Maps
A quantum causal history can be reexpressed in terms of matri x algebras. Nothing
is lost but trivial phase factors.
To any event x ∈ C, we associate the algebra,
A(x) := L[H(x)],
of matrices acting on H(x). Likewise, for any acausal ξ ⊂ C there is the algebra,
A(ξ) := L[H(ξ)] =
⨂
x∈ ξ
A(x).
The inner products on the Hilbert spaces lead to involutions on the algebras. In
this way , they can be regarded as C∗-algebras.
3A standard example of an operation that is positive but not co mpletely positive, and also not a
physical operation on a system is taking the transpose of the density matrix. See [17], p.369.
4Unital means that 1 ↦→ 1.
8

===== PAGE 9 =====

Figure 3: a) Unitary evolution for the complete pair ξ ⪯ ζ gives a ∗-isomorphism
ϕ(ξ, ζ) between the corresponding algebras. b) The acausal set ξ is a complete
past of z. ϕ(ξ, z) is a ∗-homomorphism. c) In this case, ϕ(x, z) is only a completely
positive map.
What do the unitary maps u give us? For a complete pair ξ ⪯ ζ, u determines
a ∗-isomorphism,
ϕ(ξ, ζ) : A(ζ) ˜− → A(ξ), a ↦→ u∗(ξ, ζ) a u(ξ, ζ).
If we are only interested in states (and not phase-factors), then ϕ does not lose any
important information from u.
Note that the maps ϕ are directed backward in time. This is because we are
regarding the matrix algebras as consisting of observable o perators acting on the
Hilbert spaces of local states. This is equivalent to a map of states (density matri-
ces) in the other direction. Indeed, states should evolve in to the future. However,
because the unitary maps we are starting with are invertible , everything that we
are doing can be expressed equivalently with time reversed.
What does u give us more locally? If z ∈ ζ, then A(z) can be naturally thought
of as a unital subalgebra of A(ζ). Thus, when ξ ⪯ ζ and z ∈ ζ, there is a unital
∗-homomorphism, ϕ(ξ, z) : A(z) → A(ξ), given by restricting ϕ(ξ, ζ) to A(z).
However, this is as far as homomorphisms will go. For x ∈ ξ and z ∈ ζ the
naturally induced map A(z) → A(x) is not a homomorphism; it is only completely
positive. See ﬁg.3.
Before describing the construction, we should note some pro perties of the alge-
bras that we are working with. They are simple, ﬁnite-dimensional matrix algebras
deﬁned on Hilbert spaces. As such, they can be viewed in sever al ways and have
convenient structures that are not available with most inﬁn ite-dimensional alge-
bras. We have already noted that they are C∗-algebras. They are also von Neumann
algebras, and because they are simple, they are (type I) von N eumann factors. We
will make use of the trace on such an algebra; however, we will take advantage of
the ﬁniteness and use the normalized trace, given by the form ula,
τ(a) := tr a/ tr 1.
9

===== PAGE 10 =====

The advantage of this will be to maintain the time-reversal s ymmetry of the for-
malism as explicitly as possible; the disadvantage is a slig htly unorthodox normal-
ization for density matrices ( ρ = 1 is correctly normalized).
Using the trace and the involution, we can construct an inner product on a
matrix algebra,
⟨a|b⟩ := τ(a∗b),
Making the algebra into a Hilbert space as well. Since our alg ebras are Hilbert
spaces, the linear maps among them have adjoints. In particu lar, if v : A → B is
a linear map respecting the involution ∗, the deﬁnition of its adjoint, v† reduces to
the property that for any a ∈ A and b ∈ B, τA [a v†(b)] = τB[v(a)b]. We denote the
adjoint of a map with a dagger to avoid confusion with the C ∗-algebra involution
a ↦→ a∗.
The adjoint of a homomorphism will not generally be a homomor phism, how-
ever, it will be a completely positive (CP) map. The adjoint o f any CP map is CP . If
v : A → B is CP , andA ′ ⊆ A and B ′ ⊆ B are subalgebras, then deﬁne the reduction
of v to A ′ → B ′ to be the CP map i†
B ◦ v ◦ iA , where iA : A ′֒→A and iB : B ′֒→B are
the inclusions.
A ′ iA
− − −→ A

↓v
B ′ iB
− − −→ B
5 Quantum Causal Histories Redeﬁned
A quantum causal history thus leads to CP maps for pairs of eve nts. Speciﬁcally ,
if ξ ⪯ ζ, x ∈ ξ, and z ∈ ζ, then ϕ(x, z) : A(z) → A(x) is the reduction of ϕ(ξ, ζ).
Maps for pairs of related events give a more local descriptio n of a quantum causal
history than maps for complete pairs of acausal sets. In a loc al description, we
should regard the maps ϕ(x, z) as fundamental, and specify consistency conditions
on them. This leads to two questions, do local consistency co nditions exist, and is
any information lost in going from global homomorphisms to l ocal CP maps? The
answers, we will show, are yes and no.
There is one circumstance in which the adjoint of a homomorph ism is another
homomorphism.
Theorem 1. If v : A ˜− → B is an isomorphism, then v† : B → A is its inverse (also an
isomorphism).
Proof. Homomorphisms in this category are trace-preserving. So, f or a ∈ A and
b ∈ B,
τB[v(a)b] = τB
[
v(a v−1(b))
]
= τA [a v−1(b)].
Thus v−1 = v†.
10

===== PAGE 11 =====

Figure 4: A quantum causal history associates algebras to ev ents and completely
positive maps to causal relations.
So, for ξ ⪯ ζ, ϕ(ξ, ζ) and ϕ†(ξ, ζ) are both isomorphisms. There is thus a time-
reversal covariance; this should be reﬂected in our axioms.
States on matrix algebras are all given by density matrices. Speciﬁcally , a den-
sity matrix is a positive matrix ρ with τ(ρ) = 1; the expectation value of a matrix
a is τ(aρ). The map of algebras ϕ(x, y) : A(y) → A(x) induces a pullback map
from states at x to states at y. This is simply the adjoint ϕ†(x, y) applied to density
matrices. When the map of algebras is a homomorphism, the map of states will
take pure states to pure states.
Suppose that ξ and ζ are acausal sets, not necessarily a complete pair, but that
ζ is a complete future of ξ. In this case, no information should be lost in going
from ξ to ζ, and pure states should map to pure states. Thus, there shoul d be
a homomorphism ϕ(ξ, ζ) : A(ζ) → A(ξ). Conversely , if instead ξ is a complete
past of ζ, then there should exist ϕ(ξ, ζ) : A(ζ) → A(ξ) such that ϕ†(ξ, ζ) is a
homomorphism.
Suppose that y ∼ z and that ξ is a complete past of both. The homomorphisms
ϕ(ξ, y) and ϕ(ξ, z) are restrictions of ϕ(ξ, {y, z}). So, for a ∈ A(y) and b ∈ A(z),
ϕ(ξ, y)(a) ·ϕ(ξ, z)(b) = ϕ(ξ, {y, z})(a ⊗ b) = ϕ(ξ, z)(b) ·ϕ(ξ, y)(a).
Thus the images of ϕ(ξ, y) and ϕ(ξ, z) must commute.
If such ϕ’s exist, and the ϕ(x, y)’s are reductions of them, then they will satisfy
the following properties.
Deﬁnition. A quantum causal history consists of a simple matrix C ∗-algebra A(x)
for every event x ∈ C and a completely positive map ϕ(x, y) : A(y) → A(x) for
every pair of related events x ≤ y, satisfying the following axioms.
Axiom 1: (Extension) For any y ∈ C and ξ ⊂ C a complete past of y, there exists
a homomorphism
ϕP(ξ, y) : A(y) → A(ξ),
11

===== PAGE 12 =====

P F
Figure 5: Extension. On the left-hand side, the reduction of ϕP(ξ, y) to A(x) is
ϕ(x, y). On the right-hand side, the reduction of ϕF(y, ζ) to A(ζ) is ϕ(y, z).
P P
F F
Figure 6: Spacelike commutativity . One the left-hand side, the images of ϕP(ξ, z)
and ϕP(ξ, y) (in A(ξ)) commute. On the right, the images of ϕ†
F(x, ζ) and ϕ†
F(y, ζ)
commute.
such that for each x ∈ ξ, the reduction of ϕP(ξ, y) to A(x) ⊂ A(ξ) is ϕ(x, y). Like-
wise, for any ζ ⊂ C a complete future of y, there exists a map
ϕF(y, ζ) : A(ζ) → A(y),
such that ϕ†
F(y, ζ) is a homomorphism and for any z ∈ ζ, the reduction (restriction)
of ϕF(y, ζ) to A(z) → A(y) is ϕ(y, z). See Fig.5
Axiom 2: (Spacelike Commutativity) If y ∼ z ∈ C and ξ ⊂ C is a complete past
of y and z, then the images of ϕP(ξ, z) and ϕP(ξ, y) (in A(ξ)) commute. Likewise,
if ζ ⊂ C is a complete future of {x, y}, then the images of ϕ†
F(x, ζ) and ϕ†
F(y, ζ)
commute. See Fig.6.
Axiom 3: (Composition) If ζ is a complete future of x and a complete past of y,
then ϕ(x, y) = ϕF(x, ζ) ◦ ϕP(ζ, y).
6 Quantum Fields on Causal Sets
This notion of quantum causal history can also be motivated from the ideas of alge-
braic quantum ﬁeld theory . Algebraic quantum ﬁeld theory (see [5, 9]) is a general
12

===== PAGE 13 =====

approach to quantum ﬁeld theory based on algebras of local ob servables, the rela-
tions among them, and their representations. The correct ch oice of axioms is still a
matter of research, but for our purposes, these subtleties a re largely irrelevant.
An algebraic quantum ﬁeld theory associates a von Neumann al gebra to each
causally complete region of spacetime. This generalizes ea sily to causal sets. The
following deﬁnitions are exactly the same as for continuous spacetime. For any
subset X ⊂ C, deﬁne the causal complement as
X ′ := {y ∈ C | ∀x ∈ X : x ∼ y}
the set of events which are spacelike to all of X. The causal completion of X is X ′′, and
X is causally complete if X = X ′′. A causal complement is always causally complete
(i.e., X ′′′= X ′).
In the most restrictive axiomatic formulation of algebraic quantum ﬁeld theory
there is a von Neumann algebra A(X) for every causally complete region; These all
share a common Hilbert space. Whenever X ⊆ Y, A(X) ⊆ A(Y). For any causally
complete region X, A(X ′) is A(X) ′, the commutant of A(X). The algebra associated
to the causal completion of X ∪ Y is generated by A(X) and A(Y).
Some of the standard arguments about the properties of the local von Neumann
algebras are valid for causal sets; some are not. The algebra s should all be simple
(i.e., von Neumann factors) because the theory would otherw ise have local super-
selection sectors. For continuous spacetime it is believed that the local algebras
should be type III 1 hyperﬁnite factors; however, the reasoning involves the as -
sumption that there exists a good ultraviolet scaling limit . This does not apply
here; the small-scale structure of a causal set is discrete a nd not self similar at all.
Instead, it seems reasonable (following property 4 in the in troduction) that
only a ﬁnite amount of structure should be entrusted to each e vent. In other
words, each von Neumann algebra should be a ﬁnite-dimension al matrix algebra.
In von Neumann algebra terms, these are ﬁnite type I factors.
Consider the causal completion ξ ′′ of a ﬁnite acausal set ξ; A(ξ ′′) should be
generated by the algebras A(x) for x ∈ ξ. In fact, these algebras should commute,
and therefore
A(ξ ′′) = A(ξ) =
⨂
x∈ ξ
A(x).
Evolution by homomorphisms is sometimes possible. If ξ and ζ are acausal sets
such that ζ ⊂ ξ ′′, then ζ ′′⊆ ξ ′′and so A(ζ) ⊆ A(ξ). This inclusion is the evolution
homomorphism when ξ is a complete past of ζ.
Not surprisingly , simple matrix algebras are much easier to work with than
type III von Neumann factors. Using the (unique) normalized trace, any state is
given by a density matrix. Recall that the adjoint maps ϕ†(x, y) in a quantum
causal history are the induced maps on density matrices.
Suppose that ρ ∈ A(x) is a density matrix at x. The density matrix ϕ†(x, y)(ρ) ∈
A(y) is the best approximation to ρ among density matrices at y, in the sense that
13

===== PAGE 14 =====

it minimizes the trace norm of the difference. The trace norm metric on density
matrices is equal to the metric on states induced by the opera tor norm on observ-
ables.
So, we see that the obvious notion of an algebraic quantum ﬁel d theory on a
causal set, with the physically reasonable assumption of ﬁn ite algebras on events,
gives the structure of a QCH. The two concepts intersect, but are not equivalent.
One could ignore the arguments about entropy et cetera and consider a ﬁeld
theory with inﬁnite algebras on events; however, depending upon the choice of
algebras, even this might be described by some suitable gene ralization of a QCH.
Likewise, a given QCH cannot necessarily be derived from an a lgebraic quantum
ﬁeld theory .
This does mean that the structure of a QCH encompasses a reaso nable notion
of a quantum ﬁeld theory , and hence is capable of describing m atter degrees of
freedom. It also indicates how quantum ﬁelds on curved space time might be ob-
tained as a limit of some quantum gravity model based on QCH’s . Finally , this
gives the skeptical reader another possible motivation for considering quantum
causal histories.
7 Unitary Maps from CP Maps
In this section we show that, if we start with the CP maps on the causal relations
as the fundamental evolution operators, we can recover the u nitary operators be-
tween the complete pairs.
The main result is that the axioms in the deﬁnition of a quantu m causal history
imply the following theorem:
Theorem 2. For any acausal sets ξ, ζ ⊂ C, if ζ is a complete future of ξ or ξ is a complete
past of ζ then there exists a unique map
ϕ(ξ, ζ) : A(ζ) → A(ξ)
such that
1. For any x ∈ ξ and z ∈ ζ, the reduction of ϕ(ξ, ζ) to A(z) → A(x) is ϕ(x, z).
2. If ξ is a complete past of ζ, then ϕ(ξ, ζ) is a homomorphism.
3. If ζ is a complete future of ξ, then ϕ†(ξ, ζ) is a homomorphism.
4. If ξ ⪯ ζ is a complete pair, then ϕ(ξ, ζ) is an isomorphism.
5. If ξ ⪯ υ ⪯ ζ, then ϕ(ξ, υ) ◦ ϕ(υ, ζ) = ϕ(ξ, ζ).
14

===== PAGE 15 =====

In order to prove this, we ﬁrst need to prove the uniqueness aspect. Let A, B1, B2,
et cetera be (ﬁnitely many) simple, ﬁnite-dimensional, matrix algeb ras. Let B =⨂
k Bk. Any unital homomorphism A → B has a reduction A → Bk for each k. We
need to show that two distinct homomorphisms will have disti nct reductions.
Let ι : A → B be some unital homomorphism. Any other unital homomor-
phism can be obtained from this by composing it with an automo rphism of B. All
homomorphisms in this category are injective, so to simplif y notation, regard A as
a subalgebra of B and ι as the natural inclusion. First we prove the result at the Lie
algebra level.
Denote the canonical inclusions by jk : Bk → B. The reductions of ι are simply
j†
k ◦ ι. For any β ∈ B, deﬁne ad β : B → B by adβ(a) = [ β, a]−.
Lemma 3. For any β ∈ B, if j†
k ◦ adβ ◦ι = 0 for all k, then adβ ◦ι = 0.
Proof. Let C ⊂ B be the subspace spanned by the Bk’s. By the hypothesis, for any
a ∈ A, [β, a]− must be orthogonal5 to every Bk, and thus to C. Hence for any c ∈ C,
0 = τ(c[β, a]−) = τ(β[a, c]−).
So β ∈ [A, C]⊥ . We need to show that [A, C]⊥ ⊆ A ′ (the commutant of A). The
orthogonal complement of A ′ is [A, A], so we simply need to prove that [A, A] ⊆
[A, C].
C is closed as a Lie algebra and acts unitarily on B by ad. C generates B as an
algebra, therefore the only part of B commuting with C is the center, C ⊂ B. This
is thus the only trivial C-subrepresentation in B, and so [B, C] = [ B, B]. [A, C] =
adC (A) is the sum of the nontrivial irreducible C-representations which intersect
with A. Thus indeed [A, A] ⊆ [A, C], and the claim is proven.
Lemma 4. Any homomorphism distinct from ι will have reductions distinct from those of
ι.
Proof. Let H := {h ∈ Aut B | j†
k ◦ h ◦ ι = j†
k ◦ ι ∀k} be the subgroup that leaves the
reductions of ι invariant and BH the subalgebra of H-invariant elements. Aut A ′ ⊂
Aut B leaves ι invariant, so Aut A ′ ⊆ H and BH ⊆ BAut A ′
= A. H is compact, so
we can construct the orthogonal projection p : B → → BH ⊂ B by averaging over H.
Each map j†
k ◦ ι factors through p,
j†
k ◦ ι = j†
k ◦ p ◦ ι.
Let β ∈ A be any element commuting with BH . For any a ∈ A and b ∈ BH ,
τ(b[β, a]−) = τ(a[b, β]−) = 0,
5W e are using the structure of B as a Hilbert space.
15

===== PAGE 16 =====

so p ◦ adβ = 0. Thus
j†
k ◦ adβ ◦ι = j†
k ◦ ι ◦ adβ = j†
k ◦ p ◦ ι ◦ adβ = j†
k ◦ p ◦ adβ ◦ι = 0.
Therefore β ∈ A ∩ A ′ = C. This implies that BH = A.
Any other homomorphism can be written as α ◦ ι with α ∈ Aut B. If this is
distinct from ι then α ̸∈ Aut A, but if α ◦ ι has the same reductions as ι then α ∈ H.
We would then have H larger than just Aut A ′ and thus BH would have to be a
proper subalgebra of A.
Proof of Theorem 2. Lemma 4 implies the uniqueness of the ϕP(ξ, y) in Axiom 1. If ξ
is a complete past of ζ, then if a homomorphism ϕP(ξ, ζ) : A(ζ) → A(ξ) exists with
the ϕP(ξ, z)’s (for z ∈ ζ) as its reductions, it can be reconstructed by multiplying
the ϕP(ξ, z)’s together, so ϕP(ξ, ζ) is unique. Conversely , because of Axiom 2, we
can multiply together the ϕP(ξ, z)’s to deﬁne ϕP(ξ, ζ).
Analogously , forζ a complete future of ξ, a unique map ϕF(ξ, ζ) exists, satisfy-
ing the requirements of Property 3.
Suppose that both of these are true. That is, ξ ⪯ ζ is a complete pair. We need
to show that ϕP(ξ, ζ) = ϕF(ξ, ζ) and is an isomorphism.
Because all homomorphisms in this category are injective, t he existence of ho-
momorphisms in both directions between A(ξ) and A(ζ) shows that they are of
equal dimension and therefore isomorphic. These homomorph isms must there-
fore be isomorphisms.
So, ϕ†
F(ξ, ζ) is an isomorphism, and by Theorem 1, ϕF(ξ, ζ) is its inverse. The
reductions of ϕF(ξ, ζ) are the same as for ϕP(ξ, ζ) and as it is a homomorphism,
the above uniqueness implies ϕP(ξ, ζ) = ϕF(ξ, ζ).
Now suppose that ξ ⪯ υ ⪯ ζ. Let x ∈ ξ and y ∈ ζ. By what we have proven so
far, ϕF(x, υ) is a reduction of ϕ(ξ, υ). By Axiom 3, ϕ(x, y) = ϕF(x, υ) ◦ ϕP(υ, y). So,
ϕ(x, y) is a reduction of ϕ(ξ, υ) ◦ ϕP(υ, y). By Lemma 4, since the reductions are
the same, we must have that ϕP(ξ, y) = ϕ(ξ, υ) ◦ ϕP(υ, y). Using Lemma 4 again,
this shows that ϕ(ξ, υ) ◦ ϕ(υ, ζ) = ϕ(ξ, ζ).
We have then shown that the system of isomorphisms associate d to complete
pairs can be reconstructed from the local information of CP m aps associated to
pairs of events. Because C is assumed to be locally ﬁnite, there is no problem in
going from these isomorphisms of algebras to a system of unit ary maps satisfying
the original deﬁnition of a quantum causal history; the only arbitrariness is a choice
of irrelevant phase factors.
On the other hand, the local formulation is restrictive. Not every choice of
unitary maps for complete pairs can be expressed in terms of C P maps in this way .
This formulation enforces local causality .
16

===== PAGE 17 =====

8 Conclusions
In this paper, we have provided a complete deﬁnition of a quan tum causal history ,
a pre-spacetime framework for a quantum theory of gravity in which there is a
simple matrix algebra of operators for every event in the universe (represented by a
causal set) and a completely positive evolution map for ever y causally related pair
of events. These represent the transfer of quantum informat ion between events in
the quantum spacetime. We showed that the axioms in the deﬁni tion allow us to
reconstruct the unitary evolution between complete pairs, a necessary step since
complete pairs correspond to isolated systems.
In the picture of the universe as a QCH, it can be thought of as a very large
collection of quantum-mechanical building blocks. Everyt hing is (locally) ﬁnite,
both the dimensionality of these systems as well as the causa l set. We regard this
as a simple way to model the idea that there is a ﬁnite number of fundamental
degrees of freedom in a ﬁnite region of the universe. Althoug h there is certainly
no hard evidence for this, such ideas are supported by Bekens tein’s arguments,
by the black hole entropy calculations from both string theo ry and loop quantum
gravity , and is related to holographic ideas and the argumen ts for a many-Hilbert
space M-theory in [4]. Even independent of such motivations , ﬁniteness allows
signiﬁcant simpliﬁcations which we have been able to exploi t in this paper.
It may be possible to generalize a QCH to use some inﬁnite-dim ensional alge-
bras. Theorem 2 may extend to type II 1 von Neumann factors, which have ﬁnite
traces. However, we have not investigated this possibility in detail because the
physical motivations for using matrix algebras are much str onger.
It is interesting to note the multiple ways that quantum caus al histories can be
motivated, including:
1. The original deﬁnition considering them as the general fo rmalism for causal
spin networks [14].
2. As an algebraic quantum ﬁeld theory on a causal set (Sectio n 6).
3. As an alternative to the usual quantum cosmology of a wavef unction of the
universe evolving according to the Wheeler-De Witt equatio n. A QCH is a
framework for quantum cosmology that is not restricted to gl obally hyper-
bolic spacetimes, as is the case with a WDW-type quantum cosm ology . This
is discussed in more detail in [15].
4. The local evolution in a QCH is well-suited for addressing the important
problem of identifying localized propagating degrees of fr eedom in a spin
foam, without having to use the entire partition function.
5. Precisely the same objects that we used (matrix algebras a nd CP maps) are
basic tools in quantum information theory . Conceptually , t his suggests that
17

===== PAGE 18 =====

the universe modeled as a QCH is nothing but a background-ind ependent
quantum computer. More practically , the analogue of the muc h sought-after
propagating “particle” in a spin foam, in quantum informati on theoretic lan-
guage, is a quantum channel. Tools such as the operator-sum r epresentation
of CP maps, and even ideas from the theory of error-correctio n in quantum
computation, might be used to identify such objects.
There is an important clariﬁcation we should make. If quantu m causal histories
are motivated via 2 above, then this is not gravity , but a kind of quantum ﬁeld
theory on a peculiar background. This is related to the issue of the given causal
set that a QCH is built on. If the procedure is simply “given a c ausal set C, a
QCH is constructed via the procedure of Section 5,” then this cannot have much
to do with a dynamical theory of space-time. Unless, somehow , all the gravitation
degrees of freedom are in the algebras and C is some auxiliary background, but we
are not aware of such a scheme. In the quantum causal historie s motivated from
spin foams in quantum gravity (4 above), there is an further s tep. The partition
function for a (causal) spin foam model includes a sum over al l causal sets. This
is the usual path integral formulation of quantum gravity , w ith each term in the
path integral being a QCH. It would be very interesting to und erstand if there is a
way for a QCH to be a dynamical quantum space-time without the summation of a
path integral. For this, one would need the causal set and the algebras to “interact”
with each other.
The reason why there are so many ways to understand quantum ca usal his-
tories is partly the general nature of a CP map. It is, after al l, the most general
physical transformation allowed by quantum theory . Comple tely positive maps
already appear in several places in quantum cosmology and we close this paper
by referring to a few examples.
In the context of continuous time evolution, master equatio ns are the famil-
iar tools used to describe quantum noise, for example in quan tum optics. These
are differential equations, governing the non-unitary evo lution of the density ma-
trices of dissipative quantum systems (e.g., [12, 6]). When a master equation is
integrated, the evolution of the density matrix for a ﬁnite t ime-step is given by a
completely positive map.
Another interesting comparison is between our CP maps and de coherence. The
term decoherence is used in the literature both to describe q uantum noise, and
the more speciﬁc process of phase damping that is believed to play a role in the
emergence of classicality (see, for example, [22]). Using d ecoherence to mean the
second, we note that it is possible to incorporate processes of that type in a quan-
tum causal history . In [2, 3], an interesting scheme for desc ribing decoherence was
proposed that is closely related to quantum causal historie s.
In this new formulation, with the completely positive maps a s the fundamen-
tal evolution operators, we obtain a quantum cosmology in wh ich the universe
is simply a very large collection of ﬁnite quantum systems. T he information gets
18

===== PAGE 19 =====

shufﬂed around, according to the causal structure. Local ob servers can lose infor-
mation simply because, by causality , it is not available to t hem. This is much like
information loss due to the presence of a horizon.
Finally , we note that there are several tools that can be used for the practical
implementation of CP maps in a speciﬁc model. These include t he operator-sum
representation that is frequently used in quantum informat ion theory (see [17],
chapter 8 and [20] for excellent reviews, and, for example, [ 21, 7] for the case of
dimensionality change from input to output), and the Stines pring construction in
operator algebras [10].
Acknowledgments
We are very grateful to the Jesse Phillips Foundation for pro viding the funds that
brought us together in Berlin. FM would like to thank Barbara Terhal for very use-
ful pointers to the relevant literature in quantum informat ion theory , Mike Mosca
and David Poulin for discussions on this subject, Lee Smolin and Olaf Dreyer for
their comments on this work, and the Albert Einstein Institu te, Golm, where part
of this work was carried out. Part of this work was supported b y NSF grant PHY-
0090091.
References
[1] J. Baez, “An Introduction to Spin Foam Models of Quantum Gr avity and BF Theory”,
Lect. Notes Phys. 543 (2000) 25–94 (gr-qc/9905087).
[2] R. Blute, I.T. Ivanov , P . Panangaden, “Discrete Quantum Causal Dynamics”,
gr-qc/0109053.
[3] R. Blute, I.T. Ivanov , P . Panangaden, “Decoherent histo ries on graphs”,
gr-qc/0111020.
[4] T. Banks and W. Fischler, “M-theory observables for cosmo logical space-times”,
hep-th/0102077.
[5] D. Buchholz, “Algebraic Quantum Field Theory: A Status R eport”, XIII International
Congress on Mathematical Physics (London, 2000) , 31–45, Int. Press, Boston, MA, 2001
(math-ph/0011044).
[6] A.O. Caldeira, A.J. Leggett, “Quantum tunnelling in a di ssipative system”, Ann.
Phys., 149(2) (1983) 374.
[7] M.-D. Choi, “Completely positive linear maps on complex m atrices”, Lin. Algebra
and Its Appl. 10, 285 (1975).
19

===== PAGE 20 =====

[8] S. Gupta, “Causality in spin foam models”, Phys. Rev . D61 (2000) 064014
(gr-qc/9908018).
[9] R. Haag, Local Quantum Physics (Springer V erlag, Berlin) 1992.
[10] E.C. Lance, Hilbert C ∗-modules. A toolkit for operator algebraists . C.U.P . (Cam-
bridge:1995).
[11] E.R. Livine, D. Oriti, “Implementing causality in the s pin foam quantum geometry”,
gr-qc/0210064.
[12] G. Lindblad, “On the generators of quantum mechanical s emigroups”, Commun.
Math. Phys. 48 (1976) 119–130.
[13] F. Markopoulou, “Dual formulation of spin network evolu tion”, gr-qc/9704013.
[14] F. Markopoulou, “Quantum causal histories”, Class. Qua ntum Grav .17 (2000) 2059–
2072 (hep-th/9904009).
[15] F. Markopoulou, “Planck-scale models of the Universe”, Science & Ultimate Real-
ity: Quantum Theory, Cosmology and Compexity , J.D. Barrow, P .C.W. Davies and C.L.
Harper, eds, C.U.P . (Cambridge: 2003) (gr-qc/0210086).
[16] F. Markopoulou and L. Smolin, “Causal evolution of spin n etworks”, Nucl. Phys.
B508 (1997) 409–430 (gr-qc/9702025).
[17] M.A. Nielsen and I.L. Chuang, Quantum Computation and Quantum Information, C.U.P .
(Cambridge:2000)
[18] D. Oriti, “Spacetime geometry from algebra: spin foam m odels for non-perturbative
quantum gravity”, Rept. Prog. Phys. 64 (2001) 1489–1544 (gr -qc/0106091).
[19] A. Perez, “Spin Foam Models for Quantum Gravity”, Class. Quant. Grav . 20 (2003)
R43 (gr-qc/0301113).
[20] B. Schumacher, “Sending quantum entanglement through noisy channels”, Phys.
Rev . A, 54 (1996) 2614 (quant-ph/9604023).
[21] B.M. Terhal, I.L. Chuang, D.P . DiVincenzo, M. Grassl, J.A . Smolin, “Simulat-
ing quantum operations with mixed environments”, Phys. Rev . A60 (1999) 881
(quant-ph/9806095).
[22] W.H. Zurek, “Decoherence and the transition from quant um to classical”, Physics
T oday44, 10 (October 1991) 36–44.
20