===== PAGE 1 =====

ON THE ESSENTIAL LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF
INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY IN TERMS
OF LOGICAL AND “ ∧”/LOGICAL OR “∨” RELATIONS:
REPORT ON THE OCCASION OF THE
PUBLICATION OF THE FOUR MAIN PAPERS ON
INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY
Shinichi Mochizuki
March 2024
Abstract. The main goal of the present paper is to
give a detailed exposition of the essential logical structure of inter-universal
Te i ch m ¨uller theory from the point of view of theBoolean operators— such as the
logical AND “ ∧” and logical OR “ ∨” operators — of propositional calculus. This
essential logical structure of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory may be summarized
symbolically as follows:
A∧B = A∧(B1 ˙∨B2 ˙∨ ... )= ⇒ A∧(B1 ˙∨B2 ˙∨ ... ˙∨B′
1 ˙∨B′
2 ˙∨ ... )
..
.
—w h e r e
· the “˙∨” denotes the Boolean operatorexclusive-OR, i.e., “XOR”;
· A, B, B
1, B2, B′
1, B′
2, denote various propositions;
· the logical AND “ ∧’s” correspond to the Θ-link of inter-universal Te-
ichm¨uller theory and are closely related to themultiplicative structures of
the rings that appear in the domain and codomain of the Θ-link;
· the logical XOR “ ˙∨’s” correspond to various indeterminacies that arise
mainly from the log-Kummer-correspondence, i.e., from sequences of it-
erates of the log-link of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, which may be
thought of as a device for constructingadditive log-shells.
This sort of concatenation oflogical AND “∧’s”and logical XOR “ ˙∨’s”is reminiscent
of the well-known description of the “carry-addition” operation on Teichm¨uller
representatives of thetruncated Witt ring Z/4Z in terms ofBoolean addition “˙∨”
and Boolean multiplication “∧”i nt h eﬁeld F2 and may be regarded as a sort
of “Boolean intertwining” that mirrors,i na remarkable fashion, the “arith-
metic intertwining” between addition and multiplication in number ﬁelds and
local ﬁelds, which is, in some sense, the main object of study in inter-universal Te-
ichm¨uller theory. One important topic in this exposition is the issue of“redundant
copies”, i.e., the issue of how thearbitrary identiﬁcation of copies ofisomorphic
mathematical objects that appear in the various constructions of inter-universal Te-
ichm¨uller theory impacts — and indeedinvalidates —t h eessential logical structure
of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory. This issue has been a focal point of funda-
mental misunderstandings and entirely unnecessary confusion concerning
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory in certain sectors of the mathematical community.
The exposition of the topic of “redundant copies” makes use of many interesting
elementary examples from thehistory of mathematics .
Typeset byAMS-TEX
1

===== PAGE 2 =====

2 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Contents:
Introduction
§1. Summary of non-mathematical aspects for non-specialists
§1.1. Publication of [IUTchI-IV]
§1.2. Redundancy assertions of the “redundant copies school” (RCS)
§1.3. Qualitative assessment of assertions of the RCS
§1.4. The importance of extensive, long-term interaction
§1.5. The historical signiﬁcance of detailed, explicit, accessible records
§1.6. The importance of further dissemination
§1.7. The notion of an “expert”
§1.8. Fabricated versions spawn fabricated dramas
§1.9. Geographical vs. mathematical proximity
§1.10. Mathematical intellectual property rights
§1.11. Social mirroring of mathematical logical structure
§1.12. Computer veriﬁcation, mathematical dialogue, and developmental
reconstruction
§2. Elementary mathematical aspects of “redundant copies”
§2.1. The history of limits and integration
§2.2. Derivatives and integrals
§2.3. Line segments vs. loops
§2.4. Logical AND “∧” vs. logical OR “∨”
§3. The logical structure of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory
§3.1. One-dimensionality via identiﬁcation of RCS-redundant copies
§3.2. RCS-redundancy of Frobenius-like/´etale-like versions of objects
§3.3. RCS-redundant copies in the domain/codomain of thelog-link
§3.4. RCS-redundant copies in the domain/codomain of the Θ-link
§3.5. Gluings, indeterminacies, and pilot discrepancy
§3.6. Chains of logical AND relations
§3.7. Poly-morphisms and logical AND relations
§3.8. Inter-universality and logical AND relations
§3.9. Passage and descent to underlying structures
§3.10. Detailed description of the chain of logical AND relations
§3.11. The central importance of thelog-Kummer-correspondence
List of Examples:
1.5.1. Irrationality, impartiality, and the Voodoo Hypothesis
1.5.2. The internet/mass media as an apple of discord
1.9.1. The insuﬃciency of geographical proximity
1.9.2. The remarkable potency of mathematical proximity
1.10.1. The Pythagorean Theorem
1.12.1. Explicit parametrization of Pythagorean triples
2.1.1. False contradiction in the theory of integration
2.2.1. Symmetry properties of derivatives
2.3.1. Endpoints of an oriented line segment
2.3.2. Gluing of adjacent oriented line segments
2.4.1. “∧”v s .“∨” for adjacent oriented line segments
2.4.2. Diﬀerentials on oriented line segments

===== PAGE 3 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 3
2.4.3. Representation via subgroup indices of “∧”v s .“∨”
2.4.4. Logical “∧/∨” vs. “narrative∧/∨”
2.4.5. Numerical representation of “∧”v s .“∨”
2.4.6. Carry operations in arithmetic, geometry, and Boolean logic
2.4.7. The projective line as a gluing of ring schemes along a multiplicative
group scheme
2.4.8. Gluings of rings along multiplicative monoids
3.1.1. Elementary models of gluings and intertwinings
3.2.1. Global multiplicative subspaces and bounds on heights
3.2.2. Coricity, symmetry, and commutativity properties of the log-theta-lattice
3.3.1. Classical complex Teichm¨uller theory
3.3.2. The Jacobi identity for the classical theta function
3.3.3. Theta functions and multiplicative structures
3.5.1. Bounded nature of log-shell automorphism indeterminacies
3.5.2. Examples of gluings
3.5.3. Gluings from the point of view of tilts of perfectoid ﬁelds
3.8.1. Inevitability of inner automorphism indeterminacies
3.8.2. Inter-universality and the structure of (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theaters
3.8.3. Truncated vs. proﬁnite Kummer theory and compatibility with the
p-adic logarithm
3.8.4. Symmetrizing isomorphisms, truncatibility, and thelog-Kummer-
correspondence
3.9.1. Categories of open subschemes
3.10.1. Symmetries as a fundamental non-formal aspect of gluings
3.10.2. Chains of logical AND relations via commutative diagrams
Introduction
In the present paper, we give a detailed exposition of theessential logical
structure of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory in terms of elementaryBoolean
operators such aslogical AND “∧”and logical OR “∨”. One important topic in
this exposition is the issue of“redundant copies”, i.e., the issue of how thearbi-
trary identiﬁcation of copies ofisomorphic mathematical objectsthat appear in
the various constructions of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory impacts — and in-
deed invalidates —t h eessential logical structureof inter-universal Teichm¨uller the-
ory. This issue has been a focal point offundamental misunderstandingsand
entirely unnecessary confusion concerning inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory
in certain sectors of the mathematical community [cf. the discussion of Examples
2.4.5, 2.4.7, 2.4.8].
We begin, in§1, by reporting on variousnon-mathematicalaspects of the situa-
tion surrounding inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, such as the issue of“redundant
copies”. Perhapsthemostcentralportionofthisdiscussionofnon-mathematicalas-
pects of the situation surrounding inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory concerns the
long-term, historical importance of producing detailed, explicit, mathemati-
cally substantive,a n dreadily accessiblewritten documentationof theessential
logical structureof the issues under debate [cf.§1.5]. Suchwritten documentation
of theessential logical structureof the issues under debate isespecially important

===== PAGE 4 =====

4 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
in situations such as the situation that has arisen surrounding inter-universal Te-
ichm¨uller theory, in which the proliferation oflogically unrelated fabricated
versions of the theory has led tofundamental misunderstandingsand entirely un-
necessary confusionconcerning inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory in certain sectors
of the mathematical community that aredeeply detrimentalto theoperational
normalcy o ft h eﬁ e l do fm a t h e m a t i c s[ c f .§1.3, §1.8, §1.10, §1.11, §1.12]. This dis-
cussion in §1 is supplemented by various interestinghistorical examplesrelated
to the irrationality of square roots of prime numbers [cf. Example 1.5.1], the
Pythagorean Theorem [cf. Example 1.10.1], and Pythagorean triples [cf.
Example 1.12.1].
We then proceed, in §2, to discuss elementary aspects of the mathematics
surrounding the essential logical structure of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory.
Our discussion of these elementary aspects, which concerns mathematics at thead-
vanced undergraduateor beginning graduatelevel and doesnot require any advanced
knowledge ofanabelian geometryor inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, focuses on
the close relationship between
· integrationand diﬀerentiationon — i.e., so to speak, the“diﬀerential
geometry”of — thereal line[cf. §2.1, §2.2, as well as Example 2.4.2],
· the geometry of adjacent closed intervalsof the real line and the
loops that arise by identifying various closed subspaces of such closed
intervals [cf. §2.3; Example 2.4.1], and
· Boolean operators such aslogical AND “∧”and logical OR “∨”[cf.
§2.4].
One important unifying themethat relates these seemingly disparate topics is the
theme of“carry operations”, which appear in the variousarithmetic, geomet-
ric [i.e., “gluing”], andBoolean-logical situations discussed in§2 [cf. Example
2.4.6].
On the other hand, from the point of view ofarithmetic geometry, the discus-
sion of
theprojective lineas agluingofring schemesalong amultiplicative
group scheme
given in Example 2.4.7 yields aremarkably elementary qualitative model/analogue
of the essential logical structure surrounding the gluing given by the Θ-linkin inter-
universal Teichm¨uller theory. Moreover, over the complex numbers, this example of
the projective line — i.e., which may be visualized as asphere — leads to an inter-
esting analogy between the well-known [e.g., especially, in acartographiccontext!]
metric/geodesic geometry of the sphere with the multiradial representa-
tion of the Θ-pilot in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory [cf. Example 2.4.7, (v)].
This example of the projective line discussed in Example 2.4.7 may be understood
as occupying a special rolein the exposition of the present paper in light of the
fact that it ismore directly related toscheme-theoretic arithmetic geometry
than the previously mentioned examples and leads naturally to the subsequent
ring-/monoid-theoretic Example 2.4.8, which may literally be regarded, i.e., in
a much morerigorous, technical sense, as a sort of miniature qualitative model —
that is to say, so to speak, a sort of“preview”—o ft h egluing constituted by the

===== PAGE 5 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 5
Θ-link of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory. Finally, this example of the projec-
tive line is also of interest in light of theremarkable parallelsbetween the issue of
“redundant copies”in the context of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory and the
well-known 19-th century“algebraic truths”versus“geometric fantasies”dis-
pute between Weierstrass and Riemann concerning approaches to complex function
theory [cf. the discussion of§1.5].
The preparatory topics of§2 lead naturally to the detailed exposition of the
essential logical structureof inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory given in§3. From a
strictly rigorous point of view, this exposition assumes a substantial level of knowl-
edge and understanding of the technicalities of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory
[which are surveyed, for instance, in [Alien]], although the essential mathematical
content of most of the issues discussed may in fact be understood at the level of
the elementary considerations discussed in§2. The essential logical structure
of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory may be representedsymbolically as follows:
A ∧ B = A ∧ (B1 ˙∨ B2 ˙∨ ... )
=⇒ A ∧ (B1 ˙∨ B2 ˙∨ ... ˙∨ B′
1 ˙∨ B′
2 ˙∨ ... )
=⇒ A ∧ (B1 ˙∨ B2 ˙∨ ... ˙∨ B′
1 ˙∨ B′
2 ˙∨ ... ˙∨ B′′
1 ˙∨ B′′
2 ˙∨ ... )
...
— cf. the discussion of ( ∧(˙∨)-Chn) in §3.10. [Here, “ ˙∨” denotes the Boolean
operator exclusive-OR, i.e., “XOR”.] Indeed, §3 is devoted, for the most part, to
giving a detailed exposition of various aspects of thissymbolic representation,s u c h
as the following:
· the logical AND “∧’s”in the above display may be understood as
corresponding to the Θ-link of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory and are
closely related to themultiplicative structures of the rings that appear
in the domain and codomain of the Θ-link;
· the logical XOR “ ˙∨’s”in the above display may be understood as
corresponding to variousindeterminacies that arise mainly from thelog-
Kummer-correspondence, i.e., from sequences of iterates of thelog-
link of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, which may be thought of as a
device for constructingadditive log-shells.
This appearance oflogical AND “∧’s”and logical XOR “˙∨’s”is of interest in that it
is reminiscent of the well-known description of the“carry-addition”operation on
Teichm¨uller representatives of thetruncated Witt ringZ/4Z in terms ofBoolean
addition “˙∨”a n dBoolean multiplication “∧”i nt h eﬁeld F2 and may be re-
garded as a sort of“Boolean intertwining”thatmirrors,i na remarkablefashion,
the “arithmetic intertwining”between addition and multiplication in num-
ber ﬁelds and local ﬁelds, which is, in some sense, the main object of study in
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory [cf. the discussion of Example 2.4.6, (iii); the
discussion surrounding (TrHrc) in§3.10]. The abovesymbolic representationof the
essential logical structureof inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory arises naturally from
considerations concerning suchkey topicsas
· the coricity/symmetry/commutativity properties of thelog-theta-
lattice [cf. Example 3.2.2] and the closely related signiﬁcance of working

===== PAGE 6 =====

6 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
with bothFrobenius-likeand ´etale-like objects [cf. §3.2];
· thecloselyintertwinedpropertiesof theta functionsand[p-adic/archi-
medean] logarithms[cf. Examples 3.3.2, 3.3.3, 3.8.3, 3.8.4] in the con-
text of the log-Kummer-correspondence [cf. §3.3; §3.11; Examples
3.2.1, 3.3.1];
· generalities concerning gluings [cf. §3.1, §3.4, §3.5, §3.10; Examples
3.1.1, 3.5.2, 3.10.1, 3.10.2];
· generalities concerningindeterminacies [cf. §3.5, §3.6, §3.7; Example
3.5.1];
· generalities concerning inter-universality [cf. §3.8; Examples 3.8.1,
3.8.2, 3.8.3, 3.8.4];
· generalities concerning descent to underlying structures[cf. §3.9,
§3.10, §3.11].
Acknowledgements
Thepresentpaperbeneﬁtedsubstantiallyfromnumerousdiscussionswith Ben-
jamin Collas, Ivan Fesenko, Yuichiro Hoshi, Fumiharu Kato, Emmanuel Lepage,
Arata Minamide, Wojciech Porowski, Mohamed Sa¨ıdi, Fucheng Tan, Shota Tsu-
jimura,a n dGo Yamashita. The author would like to express his appreciation to
all of these mathematicians for the time and eﬀort that they contributed to these
discussions.
Section 1: Summary of non-mathematical aspects for non-specialists
W ebe g i nw i t ha no v e r a l ls u m m a r yo fnon-mathematical aspectsof the situation
surrounding [IUTchI-IV], which may be of interest to bothnon-mathematicians
and mathematicians. We also refer to [FsADT], [FKvid], [FsDss], [FsPio] for a
discussion of various aspects of this situation from slightly diﬀerent points of view.
§1.1. Publication of [IUTchI-IV]
The four main papers [IUTchI-IV] on inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory (IUT)
were accepted for publication in the Publications of the Research Institute for
Mathematical Sciences (PRIMS) on February 5, 2020. This was announced at an
online video news conference held at Kyoto University on April 3, 2020. The four
papers were subsequently published in several special volumes of PRIMS, a leading
international journal in the ﬁeld of mathematics with a distinguished history dating
back over half a century.
Therefereeing fortheseSpecialVolumeswasoverseenbyanEditorialBoard for
the Special Volumes chaired by Professors Masaki Kashiwara and Akio Tamagawa.
[Needless to say, as the author of these four papers, I was completely excluded
from the activities of this Editorial Board for the Special Volumes.] Professor
Kashiwara, a professor emeritus at RIMS, Kyoto University, is a global leader in
the ﬁelds of algebraic analysis and representation theory. Professor Tamagawa,
currently a professor at RIMS, Kyoto University, is a leading pioneer in the ﬁeld

===== PAGE 7 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 7
of anabelian geometry and related research in arithmetic geometry. Here, it should
be noted that, to a substantial extent,
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theoryarose as an extension/application
— developed by the author in the highly mathematically stimulating en-
vironment at RIMS, Kyoto University, over the course of roughly two
decades [i.e., 1992 - 2012] — of precisely the sort ofanabelian geome-
try that was pioneered by Tamagawa.
It is for this reason that PRIMS stood out among mathematics journals worldwide
as the most appropriate — i.e., in the sense of being by far the most [and indeed
perhaps the only truly]technically qualiﬁed— journal for the task of refereeing and
publishing the four papers [IUTchI-IV] on inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory.
Both Professors Kashiwara and Tamagawa have an outstandingly high inter-
national reputation, built up over distinguished careers that span several decades.
It is entirely inconceivable that any refereeing process overseen by these mathemati-
cians might be conducted relative to anything less than the highest mathematical
standards, free of any inappropriate non-mathematical considerations. In an arti-
cle in the Asahi Shimbun [a major Japanese newspaper] published shortly after the
announcement of April 3, 2020, Professor Tamagawa is quoted as saying that he
has
“100 percent conﬁdence in the refereeing”
that was done for the four papers [IUTchI-IV].
In another article in the Asahi Shimbun [also published shortly after the an-
nouncement of April 3, 2020], Professors Shigefumi Mori, a professor emeritus at
RIMS, Kyoto University, and Nobushige Kurokawa, a professor emeritus at the
Tokyo Institute of Technology, express their expectations about the possibility of
applying inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory to other unsolved problems in number
theory.
Subsequenttothesedevelopmentsin2020, asequel[ExpEst]tothefouroriginal
papers [IUTchI-IV] on inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory was accepted for publica-
tion in the Kodai Mathematical Journal in September 2021. This sequel [ExpEst]
concerns explicit numerical estimatesin inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory and con-
tains, in particular, anew proofof Fermat’s Last Theorem.
In particular, the results proven in the four original papers [IUTchI-IV] on
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, as well as the sequel [ExpEst], may now be
quoted in the mathematical literature as results proven in papers that have been
published in leading international journals in the ﬁeld of mathematics after under-
going, in the case of the four original papers [IUTchI-IV], an exceptionally thorough
[seven and a half year long] refereeing process.
§1.2. Redundancy assertions of the “redundant copies school” (RCS)
Unfortunately, it has been brought to my attention that, despite the develop-
ments discussed in§1.1, fundamental misunderstandingsconcerning the math-
ematical content of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory persist in certain sectors of
the mathematical community. These misunderstandings center around a certain

===== PAGE 8 =====

8 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
oversimpliﬁcation —w h i c hi spatently ﬂawed, i.e., leads to an immediate contradic-
tion — of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory. This oversimpliﬁed version of inter-
universal Teichm¨uller theory is based on assertions of redundancy concerning
various multiple copies of certain mathematical objects that appear in inter-
universal Teichm¨uller theory. In the present paper, I shall refer to theschool of
thought [i.e., in the sense of a “collection of closely interrelated ideas”] constituted
by these assertions as
the “RCS”, i.e.,“redundant copies school [of thought]”.
One fundamental reason for the use of this term “RCS” [i.e., “redundant copies
school [of thought]”] in the present paper, as opposed to proper names of math-
ematicians, is to emphasize the importance of concentrating onmathematical
content, as opposed tonon-mathematical — i.e., such associal, political,o r psy-
chological— aspects or interpretations of the situation.
Thus, in a word, the central assertions of the RCS may be summarized as
follows:
Variousmultiple copiesofcertainmathematicalobjectsininter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory areredundant and hence may be identiﬁed with one
another. On the other hand, once one makes suchidentiﬁcations,o n e
obtains an immediatecontradiction.
In the present paper, I shall refer to redundancy in the sense of the assertions of the
RCS as“RCS-redundancy”, to the identiﬁcations of RCS-redundant copies that
appear in the assertions of the RCS as“RCS-identiﬁcations”, and to the over-
simpliﬁed version of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory obtained by implementing
the RCS-identiﬁcations as“RCS-IUT”.
As discussed in [Rpt2018] [cf., especially, [Rpt2018],§18], there is absolutely
no doubtthat
RCS-IUT is indeed a meaningless and absurd theory that leads immediately
to a contradiction.
A more technical discussion of this contradiction, in the language of inter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory, is given in§3.1 below, while digested versions in more elemen-
tary language of the technical discussion of§3 may be found in Examples 2.4.5,
2.4.7, 2.4.8, below.
Rather, thefundamental misunderstandingsunderlying the RCS lie in the as-
sertions of RCS-redundancy. The usual sense of the word “redundant” suggests
that there should be some sort ofequivalence,o r close logical relationship,
between the original version of the theory [i.e., IUT] and the theory obtained [i.e.,
RCS-IUT] by implementing the RCS-identiﬁcations of RCS-redundant objects. In
fact, however,
implementing the RCS-identiﬁcations of RCS-redundant objects radi-
cally alters/invalidatesthe essential logical structureof IUT
in such a fundamental way that it seems entirely unrealistic to verify any sort of
“close logical relationship” between IUT and RCS-IUT.

===== PAGE 9 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 9
A more technical discussion of thethree main typesof RCS-redundancy/RCS-
identiﬁcation — which we refer to as “(RC-Fr´Et)”, “(RC-log)”, and “(RC-Θ)” —
is given, in the language of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, in§3.2, §3.3, §3.4,
below. In fact, however, the essential mathematical content of these three
main types of RCS-redundancy/RCS-identiﬁcation isentirely elementary and
lies well within the framework ofundergraduate-level mathematics. A discussion of
this essentially elementary mathematical content is given in§2.3, §2.4 below [cf.,
especially, Examples 2.4.5, 2.4.7, 2.4.8].
One important consequence of the technical considerations discussed in §3
below is the following:
from the point of view of thelogical relationships between various as-
sertions of the RCS, themost fundamental typeof RCS-redundancy is
(RC-Θ).
That is to say, (RC-Θ) may be understood as thelogical cornerstone of the
various assertions of the RCS.
§1.3. Qualitative assessment of assertions of the RCS
As discussed in detail in§3.4 below [cf. also§2.3, §2.4],
implementing thelogical cornerstone RCS-identiﬁcation of (RC-Θ)
completely invalidatesthe cruciallogical AND “∧” propertysatis-
ﬁed by the Θ-link — a property that underlies theentire logical struc-
ture of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory.
In particular, understanding the issue of how the RCS treats this fundamental
conﬂict between the RCS-identiﬁcation of (RC-Θ) and the crucial∧-propertyof the
Θ-link is central to the issue of assessing the assertions of the RCS.
In March 2018, discussions were held at RIMS with two adherents of the RCS
concerning, in particular, (RC-Θ) [cf. [Rpt2018], [Dsc2018]]. Subsequent to these
discussions, after a few e-mail exchanges, these two adherents of the RCS informed
meviae-mailinAugust2018—inresponsetoane-mailthatIsenttotheminwhich
I stated that I was prepared to continue discussing inter-universal Teichm¨uller the-
ory with them, but that I had gotten the impression that they were not interested
in continuing these discussions — that indeed they werenot interested in continuing
these discussions concerning inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory. Inthesamee-mail,
I also stated that perhaps it might be more productive to continue these discussions
of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory viadiﬀerent participants[i.e., via “represen-
tatives”of the two sides] and encouraged them to suggestpossible candidatesfor
doing this, but they never responded to this portion of my e-mail. [Incidentally,
it should be understood that I have no objection to making these e-mail messages
public, but will refrain from doing so in the absence of explicit permission from the
two recipients of the e-mails.]
Since March 2018, I have spent a tremendous amount of time discussing the
fundamental “(RC-Θ)v s .∧-property” conﬂictmentioned above with quite
a number of mathematicians. Moreover, during the years following the March 2018
discussions, many mathematicians [including myself!] with whom I have been in

===== PAGE 10 =====

10 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
contact have devoted a quite substantial amount of time and eﬀort to analyzing
and discussing certain 10pp. manuscripts written by adherents of the RCS [cf.,
especially, the discussion of the ﬁnal page and a half of the ﬁles “[SS2018-05]”,
“[SS2018-08]” available at the website [Dsc2018]] — indeed to such an extent that
bynow, manyofuscancitenumerouskeypassagesinthesemanuscriptsbymemory.
More recently, one mathematician with whom I have been in contact has made a
quite intensive study of the mathematical content of recent blog posts by adherents
of the RCS.
Despitealloftheseeﬀorts, the only justiﬁcationforthe logical cornerstone
RCS-identiﬁcation of (RC-Θ) that we [i.e., I myself, together with the many
mathematicians with whom I have discussed these issues] could ﬁnd either in oral
explanations during the discussions of March 2018 or in subsequent written records
produced by adherents of the RCS [i.e., such as the 10pp. manuscripts referred to
above or various blog posts] were statements of the form
“I don’t see why not”.
[I continue to ﬁnd it utterly bizarre that such justiﬁcations of the assertions of
the RCS appear to be taken seriously by some professional mathematicians.] In
particular, wewereunable to ﬁnd any detailed mathematical discussionbyadherents
of the RCS of thefundamental “(RC-Θ)v s .∧-property” conﬂictmentioned
above. That is to say, in summary,
the mathematical justiﬁcation for the“redundancy”asserted in the
logical cornerstone assertion (RC-Θ) of the RCS remains acomplete
mystery to myself, as well as to all of the mathematicians that I have
consulted concerning this issue
[cf. the discussion of Examples 2.4.5, 2.4.7, 2.4.8]. Put another way, the response of
all of the mathematicians with whom I have had technically meaningful discussions
concerning the assertions of the RCS wascompletely uniformand unanimous, i.e.,
to the eﬀect that these assertions of the RCS wereobviously completely math-
ematically inaccurate/absurd, and that they had no idea why adherents of the
RCS continued to make such manifestly absurd assertions. In particular, it should
be emphasized that
I continue to search for a professional mathematician [say, in the ﬁeld of
arithmetic geometry] who feels that he/she understands the mathematical
content of the assertions of the RCS and is willing to discuss this math-
ematical content with me or other mathematicians with whom I am in
contact
[cf. the text at the beginning of [Dsc2018]]. It is worth noting that this situation
also constitutes aserious violationof article (6.)
Mathematicians should not make public claims of potential new theorems
or the resolution of particular mathematical problems unless they are able
to provide full details in a timely manner.
of the subsection entitled “Responsibilities of authors” of the Code of Practice of
the European Mathematical Society (cf. [EMSCOP]).

===== PAGE 11 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 11
In this context, one important observation that should be kept in mind is the
following [cf. the discussion of [Rpt2018],§18]:
( U n d I g ) T h e r ei safundamental diﬀerencebetween
(UndIg1) criticism of a mathematical theory that is based on asolid,
technically accurate understandingof the content and logi-
cal structure of the theory and
(UndIg2) criticism of a mathematical theory that is based on afunda-
mental ignorance of the content and logical structure of the
theory.
An elementary classical example of this sort of diﬀerence is discussed in
§2.1 below.
In the case of the RCS, the lack of any thorough mathematical discussion of the
fundamental “(RC-Θ)v s .∧-property” conﬂictmentioned above in the vari-
ous oral/written explanations set forth by adherents of the RCS demonstrates, in a
deﬁnitive way, thatnone of the adherents of the RCS has a solid, technically accu-
rate understanding of the logical structure of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory in
its original form, i.e., in particular, of the central role played in this logical structure
by the “∧-property” of the Θ-link. Put another way, the only logically consistent
explanation of this state of aﬀairs is that the theory “RCS-IUT” that adherents of
the RCS have in mind, i.e., the theory that is the object of their criticism, is simply
a completely diﬀerent—a n dlogically unrelated— theory from the theory
constituted by inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory in its original form.
Finally, it should be mentioned that although some people have asserted par-
allels between the assertions of the RCS and thefundamental error in the ﬁrst
version of Wiles’s proof of the Modularity Conjecture in the mid-1990’s, this anal-
ogy is entirely inappropriate for numerous reasons. Indeed, as is well-known,
nothing even remotely close to the phenomena discussed thus far in the present
§1.3 occurred in the case of the error in the ﬁrst version of Wiles’s proof. The fact
that there was indeed a fatal error in the ﬁrst version of Wiles’s proof was never
disputed in any way by any of the parties involved; the only issue that arose was
the issue of whether or not the proof could be ﬁxed. By contrast,no essential er-
rors have been found in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, since the four preprints
[IUTchI-IV] on inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory were released in August 2012.
That is to say, in a word, the assertions of the RCS are nothing more thanmean-
ingless, superﬁcial misunderstandingsof inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory on
t h ep a r to fp e o p l ew h oa r ec l e a r l ynot operating on the basis of a solid, technically
accurate understanding of the mathematical content and essential logical structure
of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory.
§1.4. The importance of extensive, long-term interaction
In general, the transmission of mathematical ideas between individuals
who share a suﬃcient stock ofcommon mathematical culturemay be achieved
in a relatively eﬃcient way and in a relatively brief amount of time. Typical ex-
amples of this sort of situation in the context of interaction between professional
mathematicians include

===== PAGE 12 =====

12 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
· one-hour mathematical lectures,
· week-long mathematical lecture series,a n d
· informal mathematical discussions for several days to a week.
In the context of mathematical education, typical examples include
· written or oral mathematical examinationsand
· mathematics competitions.
The successful operation of each of these examples relies, in an essential way, on
a common framework of mathematical culturethat is shared by the various
participants in the activity under consideration.
On the other hand, in the case of afundamentally new area of research,
such as inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, which evolved out of research over the
past quarter of a century concerningabsolute anabelian geometry, certain types
of categories arising from arithmetic geometry, and certain arithmetic aspects of
theta functions, the collection of mathematicians who share such a suﬃcient stock
of common mathematical culture tends to be relatively small in number. In par-
ticular, for most mathematicians — even many arithmetic geometers or anabelian
geometers — short-term interaction of the sort that occurs in the various typical
examples mentioned above isfar from suﬃcient to achieve an eﬀective trans-
mission of mathematical ideas. That is to say, no matter how mathematically
talented the participants in such platforms of interaction may be, it takes time for
the participants to
· analyze and sort out numerous mutual misunderstandings,
· develop eﬀective techniques of communicationthat can transcend such
misunderstandings, and
· digest and absorb new ideas and modes of thought.
Depending on the mathematical content under consideration, as well as on the
mathematical talent, mathematical background, and time constraints of the partic-
ipants, this painstaking process of analysis/development/digestion/absorption may
require
patiently sustained eﬀorts to continue constructive, orderly mathematical
discussions [via e-mail, online video discussions, or face-to-face meetings]
over a period ofmonths or evenyears
to reach fruition. Indeed, my experience in exposing the ideas of inter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory to numerous mathematicians over the past decade suggests
strongly that, in the case of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, it is diﬃcult to
expedite this process to the extent that it can be satisfactorily achieved in less than
h a l fay e a ro rs o .
In particular, in the case of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, a week-long
session of discussions such as the discussions held at RIMS in March 2018 with
two adherents of the RCS [cf. [Rpt2018], [Dsc2018]] isfar from suﬃcient.T h i si s
something that I emphasized, both orally during these discussions and in e-mails
to these two adherents of the RCS during the summer of 2018 subsequent to these
discussions.

===== PAGE 13 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 13
§1.5. The historical signiﬁcance of detailed, explicit, accessible records
As was discussed in§1.3, Icontinue to searchfor a professional mathematician
[say, in the ﬁeld of arithmetic geometry] who purports to understand themath-
ematical justiﬁcation for theRCS-redundancy asserted in the logical corner-
stone assertion (RC-Θ) — i.e., in particular, who has confronted the mathematical
content of thefundamental “(RC-Θ)v s .∧-property” conﬂictmentioned in
§1.3 — and who is prepared to discuss this mathematical content with me or other
mathematicians with whom I am in contact. Of course,
a detailed, explicit, mathematically substantive,a n dreadily ac-
cessible written exposition
— i.e., as an alternative to direct mathematical discussions [via e-mail, online video
discussions, or face-to-face meetings] — of themathematical justiﬁcationfor the log-
ical cornerstone assertion (RC-Θ) would also be quite welcome [cf. the discussion
of [Rpt2014], (7)]. Moreover, in this context, it should beemphasized that such a
detailed, explicit, mathematically substantive, and readily accessible written expo-
sition would be of great value not only forprofessional mathematicians and graduate
students who are involved with inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory at thepresent
time, but also for scholars in the[perhaps distant!] future.
In general, it cannot be overemphasized that maintaining such detailed, ex-
plicit, mathematically substantive, and readily accessible written records is
of fundamental importanceto thedevelopment of mathematics.
Indeed, as was discussed in the ﬁnal portion of [Rpt2018],§3, from ahistorical
point of view, it is only by maintaining such written records that the ﬁeld of math-
ematics can avoid the sort of well-known and well-documentedconfusion that
lasted for so many centuries concerning“Fermat’s Last Theorem”.M o r e o v e r , i t
is fascinating to re-examine, from the point of view of a modern observer, thein-
tense debates that occurred, during the time ofGalileo, concerning the theory of
heliocentrismor, during the time ofEinstein, concerning thetheory of relativity.
Perhaps a more pertinent example [as was pointed out to the author byFu-
miharu Kato], relative to the issue of “redundant copies”, may be found in
the well-known dispute — i.e., concerning“algebraic truths”[which corresponds
to Weierstrass’ approach] versus“geometric fantasies”[which corresponds to Rie-
mann’s approach] — in the 19-th century betweenWeierstrass and Riemann con-
cerning approaches to complex function theory [cf. [Btt]]. That is to say, the
criticism by Weierstrass of the “geometric fantasies” approach due to Riemann via
analytic continuationon Riemann surfaces, which are obtained by
gluing to-
gether—whatare, perhapstosomeobservers, seemingly “redundant”!— copies
of open subsets of the complex plane [cf. the discussion of the well-known gluing
construction of theprojective linein Example 2.4.7 below; the discussion ofana-
lytic continuationof thecomplex logarithmin the discussion surrounding (FxEuc)
in §3.1 below, as well as in Example 3.10.1 below; the illustrations of [AnCnCv],
[AnCnLg]!], exhibitsremarkable parallelsin spirit to the assertions of the RCS.
Here, it is also of interest to note [as was pointed out to the author byBen-
jamin Collas] that the issue ofanalytic continuation of the complex logarithm is
very closely related to the long and heated dispute betweenLeibniz and [Johann]

===== PAGE 14 =====

14 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Bernoulli concerning the appropriate deﬁnition of logarithms ofnegative and more
general complex numbers— a dispute that was ultimately, in some sense, resolved
by Euler’s formulaand the acceptance of themulti-valued natureof the complex
logarithm[cf. the discussion of“Euler’s Formula and Its Consequences”in [AnHst],
Chapter I, §I.5, although it must be kept in mind that in Euler’s time, complex
function theory, i.e., of the sort necessary to treat the complex logarithm as a
holomorphic function, had not yet been developed]. Thismulti-valued nature
of the complex logarithm is closely related not only to the theory ofanalytic
continuation of thecomplex logarithm, but also to the theory ofcoverings [in the
sense of the classical topological fundamental group], where the indeterminacy in
values may be understood as an indeterminacy in the choice ofbasepoint,t h a ti s
to say, as a sort ofdistant — though nonetheless quitedirect!— ancestor of
the inter-universal indeterminaciesthat appear in inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory [cf. the discussion of§3.8, especially Example 3.8.1, below!].
The central role occupied by the notion ofanalytic continuationin these his-
torical disputes of Weierstrass/Riemann and Leibniz/Bernoulli is also of interest, in
the context of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, in light of the central role played,
in the history ofanalytic continuation,b yt h efunctional equation [i.e., Jacobi
identity] for thetheta function, which exhibitsnumerous remarkable structural
similarities to inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory [cf. the discussion of Example
3.3.2 below], and which is also closely related to Riemann’s famous research con-
cerningthetheoryofthe functional equation/analytic continuationofthe Riemann
zeta function. Research in the 19-th century concerninganalytic continuation
may also be regarded as a sort of earlyprecursor of more modern notions such
as monodromy representationsand connections/crystals — an observation
which is of interest in light of the analogy betweenconnections/crystals and the
notion ofmultiradiality in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory [cf. the discussion of
[Alien], §3.1, (v), as well as the discussion of§3.5, §3.10 below].
Before proceeding, we remark that it is interesting to observe that this his-
torical discussion of the functional equation of the theta function in the context
of analytic continuation,i nt h i sc a s eo nt h eupper half-plane, is reminiscent of the
famous observation of Poincar´e — i.e., in the form of an idea that came to him
while in transit during his travels — that “the transformations” that he had used
“to deﬁne Fuchsian functions were identical with those of non-Euclidian geometry”
[cf. [Pnc], p. 53]. This famous observation concerning theisomorphic nature of the
group of transformationsof a modular function — i.e., such as thetheta function
— and a certaingroup of symmetriesof the [“non-Euclidean”]hyperbolic geometry
of the upper half-plane seems to be one of the principal motivations behind the
famous quote, due toPoincar´e,t h a t
“mathematics is the art of giving the same name to diﬀerent things”, i.e.,
“things which diﬀer in matter, but are similar in form”
[cf. the discussion of [Pnc], pp. 34 – 35]. Moreover, thisremarkable train of thought,
which was recorded for posterity by Poincar´e in [Pnc], is of particular interest in
the context of the present discussion of the relationship between various classical
notions and inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory in that it seems almostprescient
in itsdeep resemblanceto the main notions — namely,coricity and multiradiality

===== PAGE 15 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 15
— that underlie the concept ofinter-universality in inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory. Indeed:
(SmDﬀ1) The search forcoric structures in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory may
be thought of precisely as the search for the“same name”for suitable
portions of structures on opposite sides — i.e.,“diﬀerent things”—o ft h e
Θ- orlog-links in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory. Moreover, perhaps
the most fundamental instance of such a coric structure in inter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory consists of the abstract topological groups, regarded
up toisomorphism, underlying the Galois groups/arithmetic fundamental
groups that arise from rings/schemes on opposite sides of the Θ- orlog-
links.
(SmDﬀ2) The search formultiradialstructures in inter-universal Teichm¨uller the-
ory may be thought of precisely as the search for the“same name”— i.e.,
more precisely, in the form of anisomorphism up to suitable indetermina-
cies —f o r
· a suitable portion of thesystem [or portion of the log-theta-
lattice] consisting of distinct ring/scheme structures linked by
the Θ-link, on the one hand, and
· a suitable portion of a single ring/scheme structure, on the
other
— i.e., for“things which diﬀer in matter”.
Moretechnicaldetailsmaybefoundinthediscussionof coricityandinter-universality
in §3.2, §3.8, below, aswellinthediscussionof descentviathe multiradial algorithms
of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory given in§3.10, §3.11, below.
Of course, from the point of view of a modern observer who is well-versed in
axiomatic set theoryand the theory of[Grothendieck] universes, the bitter
historical disputes of Weierstrass/Riemann and Leibniz/Bernoulli discussed above
seem somewhat quaint or even“silly”. One should not, however, in this context,
overlook the importance of such bitter historical disputes in motivating the develop-
ment of such modern tools asaxiomatic set theoryand the theory of[Grothendieck]
universes,w h i c hunderlie this privileged viewpoint of the modern observer. Con-
versely, when viewed from this historical perspective, the assertions of the RCS
seem all the more like a sort ofbizarre anachronism, which hasno place in the
21-st century[cf., especially, theentirely elementarynature of the various examples
— such as the gluing construction of the projective line discussed in Example 2.4.7
— that appear in§2 below]! Moreover, in the case of the Leibniz/Bernoulli dispute,
it is of interest to note — especially, in the context of thehighly sensationalist
nature of the coverage of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory in theEnglish-language
mass-mediaand internet [cf., e.g., the discussion of§1.8, §1.10, §1.12 below] — that
apparently, at the time of the dispute, the dispute was kept assecret as possiblein
order to avoid“damaging the prestige of pure mathematics as an exact and rigorous
science”[cf. the discussion of“Euler’s Formula and Its Consequences”in [AnHst],
Chapter I, §I.5]. At any rate, in the context of this sort of historical discussion, it
cannot be overemphasized that
all of thesehistorical re-examinations[i.e., of the sort that underlie the
discussion of the last few paragraphs!] are technically possible precisely

===== PAGE 16 =====

16 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
because of the existence ofdetailed, explicit, mathematically sub-
stantive,a n dreadily accessible written expositions of the logical
structure underlying the various central assertions that arose in the de-
bate.
In this context, it should be noted that, from a historical point of view, one
pattern that typically underlies the formidable deadlocks that tend to occur
in such debates is the point of view, on the part of parties opposed to a newly
developed theory, that
(CmSn) it is a “matter of course”or “common sense”— i.e., in the lan-
guage of the above discussion, a matter that is soprofoundly self-evident
that any “decent, reasonable observer”would undoubtedly ﬁnddetailed,
explicit, mathematically substantive, and readily accessiblewritten expo-
sitions of itslogical structureto beentirely unnecessary— that the
issues under consideration can be completely resolved within some exist-
ing, familiar framework of thought without the introduction of the newly
developed theory, which is regarded asdeeply disturbingand unlikely to be
of use in any substantive mathematical sense
— cf., e.g., the discussion of Example 1.5.1 below. In fact, however,
(OvDlk) ultimately, the only meaningful technical toolthat humanity can apply
to develop the cultural infrastructure necessary to overcome such
deadlocks is precisely the production ofdetailed, explicit, mathematically
substantive, and readily accessiblewritten expositions of the logical
structure underlying the points of view that are regarded by certain
parties as being a“matter of common sense”
[cf. the discussion of [EMSCOP] in §1.3; the discussion of (UndIg) in §1.3; the
discussion of§1.10 below;§2.1 below; the discussion of (FxRng), (FxEuc), (FxFld),
(RdVar) in§3.1 below].
Example 1.5.1: Irrationality, impartiality, and the Voodoo Hypothesis.
(i) We begin by recalling the very classical and elementary proof that, for
any prime numberp, √ p is irrational, i.e., that there does not exist any rational
number whose square is equal top. Indeed, if there did exist a rational number
r = a/b,w h e r ea and b are relatively prime nonzero integers, such thatr2 = p,t h e n
the resulting relation a2 = p · b2 would violate the unique factorization property
satisﬁed by the nonzero integers. This unique factorization property may, in turn,
by veriﬁed by applying theEuclidean division algorithm.
(ii) The discovery of the irrationality of square roots of prime numbers dis-
cussed in (i) is typically attributed, in the casep = 2 [in which case the Euclidean
division algorithm amounts, in essence, to the classiﬁcation of integers intoodd
and even integers], to the ancient Greek philosopherHippasus. Apparently, this
discovery arose in the context of applying thePythagorean Theorem[cf. the discus-
sion of Examples 1.10.1, 1.12.1 below] to compute the length of the diagonal of a
square with sides of length 1. ThePythagorean schoolwas reported to have found
this discovery to beshocking and deeply disturbing, and indeed it seems that this

===== PAGE 17 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 17
negative appraisalof Hippasus’ discovery may have led to the death of Hippasus
by drowning.
(iii) The sort ofnegative appraisal that occurred in (ii) could easily arise in
the mind of any observer — indeed,even modern observers[such as students] who
are not familiar with the sort ofabstract mathematical reasoningthat underlies the
proof of (i) — who has a deep sense of conﬁdence in his/her understanding of the
“common sense deﬁnition of mathematics”as the study of explicit computations
involving rational numbers, e.g., of the sort that may be done with a desktop
calculator [or, in earlier centuries, with an abacus!]. [We refer to Example 1.5.2
below for further similar examples of this sort of phenomenon.] Such a negative
appraisal on the part of a stronglycomputationally oriented observermight also be
additionally supported by
(HeurBlf) a heuristically supported belief that “surely” if one is given suﬃcient
time and manpower to perform suitable computations tosuﬃciently high
order, then there is no doubt that one should be able to ﬁnd arational
square root of2.
Moreover, depending on the social/political circumstances surrounding the situa-
tion, even third parties who are ignorant of the details of situation might be led
(FsObjImpl) to [falsely!] assert that the only truly objective or impartial way to
treat the two schools — i.e., of people who assert theirrationality of
√
2
via the proof of (i) and people who doubt this argument — is to talk as
if the issue of the irrationality of
√
2i s unresolvable or even torefuse to
discuss the issue at all.
Indeed, it is worth recalling that ancient accounts of Hippasus and the Pythagorean
school are astark reminderof just how dire the consequences can be when those
who are socially/politically recognized as “objective arbiters”for a mathematical
dispute act on the basis of agrossly mathematically inaccurateunderstanding of
the situation.
(iv) In the context of the discussion of (iii), it is useful to refer to a situation
[i.e., such as the situation discussed in (iii)] in whichthe validity of a mathematical
proof is called into question, not on the basis of some sort of logical defect [i.e.,
such as a gap in the proof], but on the basis of some sort ofheuristically based
belief [cf. (HeurBlf)] to the eﬀect that “surely” if one is given suﬃcient time
and manpower to sort through varioustechnical details, then there is no doubt
that one should be able to ﬁnd some sort of substantive problem with the proof
—s u c ha sacounterexample or fallacious reasoning, i.e., some sort of “voodoo”
—a sa ni n v o c a t i o no ft h e“Voodoo Hypothesis”. Once theVoodoo Hypothesis
has been invoked, mathematicians who have a mathematically accurate, rigorous
understanding of the proof in question are then often portrayed as being nothing
more thanmindlessly obedient zombies, i.e., who are acting solely or essentially
under the inﬂuence of the “voodoo” applied in the proof. Indeed, this is precisely
the sort of situation that has developed, in certain sectors of the mathematical
community, concerning inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory — cf. the discussion of
RCS-IUT in §1.2, §1.3, as well as §1.8, §1.10 below; Examples 2.4.5, 2.4.7, 2.4.8
below; the discussion of (FxRng), (FxEuc), (FxFld), (RdVar) in§3.1 below.

===== PAGE 18 =====

18 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(v) At this point, we observe that the discussion of (ii), (iii), and (iv) prompt
the following question:
What lessons may be learned from the discussion in (ii), (iii), and (iv) of
the negative appraisalof the proof of the irrationality of
√
2?
First of all, it is important to remember that
(Blf̸=Pf) heuristically based beliefs,a si n( H e u r B l f ) ,a r enot mathematical
proofs and, in particular, cannever serve as a“viable substitute”for a
rigorous mathematical proof.
Secondly, it is important to remember [cf. (FsObjImpl)] that
(MthAcc) a truly objective/impartial position concerning a mathematical dis-
pute can only be achieved as a result of amathematically accurate
understanding of the mathematics involved and, in particular, cannever
be achieved through anignoranceof the mathematics involved.
In this context, it is interesting to note that (MthAcc) has important consequences
from the point of view of the topic ofcomputer veriﬁcation of mathematical
assertions [cf. the discussion surrounding (CmpVer) in§1.12 below]. That is to say,
for instance, in the case of the proof of (i), although it is not so technically diﬃcult
to formalize this [relatively simple!] argument in such a way that the argument
could be “veriﬁed” by a computer,
(SocPol) such a computer veriﬁcation becomes entirely socially/politically
meaningless in situations in which parties — such as thecomputation-
ally oriented observerof (iii)! — who do not share or recognize theabstract
conceptual mathematical frameworkthat necessarily underlies any sort of
computer-ready formalization of the proof of (i) hold a monopoly on so-
cial/political authority.
T h u s ,i ns u m m a r y ,f r o mahistorical point of view, it seems that themain lessonto
be learned from the situation discussed in (ii), (iii), and (iv) is
(LTInfr) the fundamental importance — in the context of dealing in a mean-
ingful and eﬀective manner with mathematical disputes — of maintain-
ing a long-term infrastructural apparatus for directly confronting,
disseminating, and further developing the mathematics involved [cf. the
discussion surrounding (BlkAcc) in§1.12 below].
Needless to say, the starting point of the activities of such a long-term infras-
tructural apparatus necessarily lies in the production ofdetailed, explicit, mathe-
matically substantive, and readily accessiblewritten expositions of the logical
structure underlying the points of view that are regarded by various parties as
being a“matter of common sense”.
Example 1.5.2: The internet/mass media as an apple of discord.In Ex-
ample 1.5.1 [cf., especially, the discussion of“modern observers”in Example 1.5.1,
(iii)], the particular example of the issue of the irrationality of
√
2 was examined in
detail. In fact, however, this sort of situation exists in quite substantial abundance
throughout mathematics and especially throughout the sort of elementary mathe-
matics that is commonly covered in primary and secondary, as well as in university,
eduation. Well-known examples of this phenomenon include the following:

===== PAGE 19 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 19
(NegInt) the sense, in the context of multiplication of positive and negative inte-
gers, thatany product of two negative integersmust be anegative integer,
i.e., on the grounds that the appearance of “two minus signs” in the prod-
uct “surely” results in output that is“all the more negative!”;
(MxDiag) the sense, in the context of elementary linear algebra, that “surely”all
matrices are diagonalizable, i.e., if one just tries hard enough to ﬁnd the
“right basis!”.
Moreover, unlike the case with the ancient context discussed in Example 1.5.1, (ii),
this sort of phenomenon can be substantially further exacerbated in modern con-
texts by theinternet/mass media, which exhibits a conspicuous tendency to operate
as a sort of“apple of discord”that has the eﬀect of not only creating, but also
amplifying to often absurd proportions, anartiﬁcial socio-political dynamic that
fuels a burning desire toleap to conclusionsand achieve“instant satisfaction”with
respect to some sort of essentially meaningless ﬁctional/delusional mirage, e.g., with
respect to achieving an understanding of some sort of apparently puzzling mathe-
matical phenomenon of the sort described in (NegInt), (MxDiag) that appears, to
some observers, to defy theirdeep heuristic “common sense” understandingof the
situation — cf. the discussion of§1.8, §1.10, §1.12, below. Finally, we observe that,
just as in the case of the discussion surrounding (LTInfr) in Example 1.5.1, (v),
the only way, to the knowledge of the author at the time of writing, to overcome
the detrimental eﬀects of such artiﬁcial socio-political dynamics lies in maintaining
a long-term infrastructural apparatusfor directly confronting, disseminating, and
further developing the mathematics involved, the starting point of which inevitably
involves the production ofdetailed, explicit, mathematically substantive, and readily
accessiblewritten expositionsof thelogical structureunderlying the points of
view that are regarded by various parties as being a“matter of common sense”.
§1.6. The importance of further dissemination
One fundamental and frequently discussed theme in the further development
of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory is the issue of increasing the number of profes-
sional mathematicians who have asolid, technically accurate understanding
of the details of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory. Indeed, this issue is in some
sense the central topic of [Rpt2013], [Rpt2014]. As discussed in§1.4, in order to
achieve such a solid, technically accurate understanding of the theory, it is neces-
sary to devote a substantial amount oftime and eﬀortover a period of roughly
half a year to two or three years, depending on various factors. It also requires the
participation of professional mathematicians or graduate students who are
· suﬃciently familiar with numerous more classical theories in arithmetic
geometry [cf. the discussion of [Alien],§4.1, (ii); [Alien],§4.4, (ii)],
· suﬃciently well motivated and enthusiasticaboutstudyinginter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory, and
· suﬃciently mathematically talented,a n dw h oh a v ea
· suﬃcient amount of timeto devote to studying the theory.
As a result of quite substantial dissemination eﬀorts not only on my part, but
also on the part of many other mathematicians, the number of professional mathe-
maticians who have achieved a suﬃciently detailed understanding of inter-universal

===== PAGE 20 =====

20 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Teichm¨uller theory to make independent, well informed, deﬁnitive statements con-
cerning the theory that may be conﬁrmed by existing experts on the theory [cf. also
the discussion of§1.7 below] is roughly on the order of 10. It is worth noting that
although this collection of mathematicians is centered around RIMS, Kyoto Uni-
versity, it includes mathematicians of many nationalities and of age ranging from
around 30 to around 60. One recent example demonstrated quite dramatically that
it is quite possible to achieve a solid mathematical understanding of inter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory as a graduate student by studying on one’s own, outside of
Japan, and with essentially zero contact with RIMS, except for a very brief pe-
riod of a few months at the ﬁnal stage of the student’s study of inter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory.
Finally, we observe, in the context of the discussion [cf.§1.3, §1.4, §1.5] of the
assertions of the RCS, that another point that should be emphasized is that it is
also of fundamental importance to
increase the number of professional mathematicians [say, in the ﬁeld of
arithmetic geometry] who have asolid technical understandingof the
mathematical content of theassertions of the RCS,a n dw h oa r ep r e -
pared to discuss this mathematical content with members of the“IUT
community”
[i.e., with mathematicians who are substantially involved in mathematical research
and/ordisseminationactivitiesconcerninginter-universalTeichm¨ ullertheory]. Here,
we note in passing that such asolid technical understandingof the mathematical
content of the assertions of the RCS isby no means “equivalent”to expressions
of support for the RCS on the basis ofnon-mathematical — i.e., such associal,
political,o rpsychological— reasons. In this context, it should also be emphasized
and understood [cf. the discussion of [Rpt2014], (7)] thatboth
· producing detailed, explicit, mathematically substantive,a n dreadily ac-
cessible written expositionsof themathematical justiﬁcationof assertions
of the RCS [such as (RC-Θ)!], i.e., as discussed in§1.5, and
· increasing the number of professional mathematicians [say, in the ﬁeld
of arithmetic geometry] who have asolid technical understandingof the
mathematical content of the assertions of the RCS, and who are prepared
to discuss this mathematical content with members of the IUT community
are in theinterest not onlyof the IUT community, but of the RCSas well.M o r e -
over,
the process of attaining asolid, technically accurate understandingof the
precise logical relationship between RCS-IUT and IUT, i.e., as ex-
posed, for instance, in the present paper, can serve as avaluable peda-
gogical tool
[cf. the discussion of [Rpt2018], §17] for mathematicians currently in the process
of studying inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory.

===== PAGE 21 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 21
§1.7. The notion of an “expert”
One topic that sometimes arises in the context of discussions ofdissemination
of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory [i.e., as in§1.6], is the following issue:
What is thedeﬁnition of, or criterion for, being an“expert”on inter-
universal Teichm¨uller theory?
In a word, it is very diﬃcult to give a brief, deﬁnitive answer, e.g., in the form of a
straightforward, easily applicable criterion, to this question. On the other hand, in
thiscontext, itshouldalsobepointedoutthatthediﬃcultiesthatariseinthecaseof
inter-universalTeichm¨ullertheoryare, infact, notsoqualitativelydiﬀerentfromthe
diﬃculties that arise in answering theanalogous questionfor mathematical theories
other than inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory. These diﬃculties arise throughout
the daily life of professional mathematicians in numerous contexts, such as the
following:
(Ev1) preparing suitable exercises or examination problems to educate and
evaluate students,
(Ev2) evaluating junior mathematicians,
(Ev3) refereeing/evaluating mathematical papersfor journals.
From my point of view, as the author of [IUTchI-IV], onefundamental criterion
that I always keep in mind — not only the in case of [IUTchI-IV], but also in the
case of other papers that I have written, as well as when I am involved in the various
types ofevaluation procedures(Ev1) ∼ (Ev3) discussed above — is the issue of
the extent to which the level of understanding of the mathematician in
question enables the mathematician to “stand on his/her own two feet”
with regard to various assertions concerning the theory, on the basis of
independent, logical reasoning, without needing to be “propped up” or cor-
rected by me or other known experts in the theory.
I often refer to this criterion as the criterion ofautonomy of understanding.
Of course, from a strictly rigorous point of view, this criterion is, in some sense,
not so “well-deﬁned” and, in many contexts, diﬃcult to apply in a straightforward
fashion. On the other hand, in the past, various mathematicians involved with
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory have demonstrated such anautonomous level of
understanding in the following ways:
(Atm1) the ability to detect variousminor errors/oversightsin [IUTchI-III];
(Atm2) the ability to propose new, insightful ways of thinking about various
aspects of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory;
(Atm3) the ability to propose ways of modifying inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory so as to yieldstronger or more eﬃcientversions of the theory;
(Atm4) the ability to producetechnically accurate oral or written expositionsof
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory;
(Atm5) the ability to supervise or directnew mathematicians — i.e., by train-
ing/educating professional mathematicians or graduate students with re-
gard to inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory — who, in due time, demon-
strate various of the four types of ability (Atm1) ∼ (Atm4) discussed
above.

===== PAGE 22 =====

22 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Of course, just as in the case of other mathematical theories, diﬀerent experts
demonstrate their expertise in diﬀerent ways. That is to say, experts in inter-
universal Teichm¨uller theory often demonstrate their expertise with respect to some
of these ﬁve types of ability (Atm1)∼ (Atm5), but not others.
In this context, it should be pointed out that one aspect of inter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory that is currently still under development is the analogue for
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory of (Ev1), i.e., preparing suitableexercises for
mathematicians currently in the process of studying inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory. This point of view may be seen in the discussion in the ﬁnal portion of
the Introduction to [Alien], as well as in the discussion of“valuable pedagogical
tools”in [Rpt2018], §17 [cf. also the discussion in the ﬁnal portion of§1.6 of the
present paper]. Indeed, many of the technical issues discussed in [Rpt2018],§15
[or, alternatively, Example 3.2.2 of the present paper], may easily be reformulated
as “exercises”or, alternatively, as“examination problems”for evaluating the level
of understanding of mathematicians in the process of studying inter-universal Te-
ichm¨uller theory.
§1.8. Fabricated versions spawn fabricated dramas
As discussed in §1.6, §1.7, by now there is a substantial number of mathe-
maticians who have attained athorough, accurate, and automous understandingof
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory. In each of the cases of such mathematicians that
I have observed thus far, such an understanding of the theory was achieved essen-
tially by means of athorough study of the original papers [IUTchI-IV], followed by
ap e r i o do fconstructive discussions with one or more existing expertsthat typically
lasted roughly from two to six months to sort out and resolve various “bugs” in the
mathematician’s understanding of the theory that arose when the mathematician
studied the original papers on his/her own [cf. the discussion of§1.4].
On the other hand, there is also a growing collection of mathematicians who
have a somewhatinaccurate and incomplete — and indeed often quitesuperﬁcial
— understanding of certain aspects of the theory. This in and of itself is not
problematic — that is to say, so long as the mathematician in question maintains
an appropriate level of self-awarenessof the inaccurate and incomplete nature of
his/her level of understanding of the theory — and indeed is a phenomenon that
often occurs as abstract mathematical theories are disseminated.
Unfortunately, however, a certain portion of this collection of mathematicians
[i.e., whoseunderstandingofthetheoryisinaccurateandincomplete]haveexhibited
a tendency to
assert/justify the validity of their inaccurate and incomplete understand-
ing of the theory by means of“reformulations”or “simpliﬁcations”
of the theory, which are in factsubstantively diﬀerent fromand haveno
directly logical relationshipto [e.g., areby no means “equivalent”to!] the
original theory.
Indeed, the version, referred to in the present paper as “RCS-IUT” [cf. §1.2],
that arises from implementing the assertions of the RCS appears to be the most
famousofthesefabricatedversionsofinter-universalTeichm¨ ullertheory[cf. alsothe

===== PAGE 23 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 23
discussion of Example 2.4.5 below for a more detailed discussion of various closely
related variants of RCS-IUT]. On the other hand, other, less famous fabricated
versions of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory have also come to my attention in
recent years.
Here, before proceeding, we note that, in general, reformulations or simpliﬁca-
tions of a mathematical theory arenot necessarily problematic, i.e., so long as they
are indeed based on athorough and accurate understandingof the original theory
and, moreover, can be shown to have adirect logical relationshipto the original
theory.
The authoring of fabricated versions of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory ap-
pears to be motivated, to a substantial extent, by a deep desire to recast inter-
universal Teichm¨uller theory in a“simpliﬁed”form that ismuch closerto the sort
of mathematics with which the author of the fabricated versionis already famil-
iar/feels comfortable. On the other hand, this phenomenon of producing fabricated
versions also appears to have been
substantially fueled by numerousgrotesquely distorted mass media reports
and comments on the English-language internet that blithely paint inter-
universal Teichm¨uller theory as a sort ofcult religion, fanatical political
movement, mystical philosophy,o rvague sketch/proposal for a mathemat-
ical theory.
Moreover, another unfortunate tendency, of which RCS-IUT is perhaps the most
egregious example, is for fabricated versions of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory
to
spawn lurid social/political dramas revolving around the content of
the fabricated version, which in fact have essentially nothing to do with
the content of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory.
Such lurid dramas then spawn further grotesquely distorted mass media reports and
comments on the English-language internet, which then reinforce and enhance the
social/political status of the fabricated version [cf. the discussion of Example 1.5.2].
Here, it should be emphasized that suchvicious spiralshave little [or nothing] to
do with substantive mathematical content and indeed serve only to mass-produce
unnecessary confusionthat is entirely counterproductive, from the point of the
view of charting a sound, sustainable course in the future development of the ﬁeld
of mathematics [cf. the discussion of [Alien],§4.4, (iv)].
In fact, of course, inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory is neither a religion, nor
a political movement, nor a mystical philosophy, nor a vague sketch/proposal for a
mathematical theory. Rather, it should be emphasized that
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory is a rigorously formulated mathematical
theory that has been veriﬁed countless times by quite a number of mathe-
maticians, has undergone an exceptionally thorough seven and a half year
long refereeing process, and was subsequently published in a leading inter-
national journal in the ﬁeld of mathematics.
[cf. the discussion of§1.1]. In particular, in order to avoid the sort ofvicious spirals
referred to above, it is of the utmost importance

===== PAGE 24 =====

24 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
to concentrate, in discussions of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, on
substantive mathematical content, as opposed tonon-mathematical
—s u c ha ssocial, political,o r psychological — aspects or interpretations
of the situation.
As discussed in§1.2, this is the main reason for the use of the term “RCS” in the
present paper.
§1.9. Geographical vs. mathematical proximity
Historically, mathematical interaction between professional mathematicians re-
lied on physical meetings or the exchange of hardcopy documents. Increasingly,
however, advances in information technology have made it possible for mathemati-
cal interaction between professional mathematicians to be conducted electronically,
by means of e-mail or online video communication. Of course, this does not imply
that physical meetings or the exchange of hardcopy documents — especially in sit-
uations where physical meetings or the exchange of hardcopy documents do indeed
function in ameaningful way, from the point of view of those involved — should
necessarily be eschewed.
On the other hand, physical meetings between participants who live in dis-
tant regions requirestravel. Moreover, travel, depending on the situations of the
participants, can be ahighly taxing enterprise. Indeed, travel, as well as lodging
accommodations, typically requires the expenditure of a quite substantial amount
of money, as well asphysical and mental eﬀorton the part of those involved.
This eﬀortcan easily climb tounmanageable [i.e., from the point of view of certain
of the participants]proportions, especially whensubstantial cultural— i.e., either in
mathematicalor innon-mathematicalculture, or inboth— diﬀerencesare involved.
The current situation involving the COVID-19 pandemic adds yet another dimen-
sion to thereckoning, from the point of view of the participants, of the physical
and mental eﬀort that must be expended in order to travel. As a result,
when, from the point of view of at least one of the key participants, the
amount of eﬀort, time, and/or money that must be expended to travel
clearly exceeds, by a substantial margin — i.e., “≫ ”—t h egain [i.e.,
relative to various mathematical or non-mathematical criteria of the key
participant in question] that appears likely to be obtained from the travel
under consideration, it is highly probable that the travel under considera-
tion will end up simply not taking place.
One “classical” example of this phenomenon “≫ ” is the relative scarcity of profes-
sional mathematicians in Europe or North America who travel to Japan frequently
[e.g., at least once a year] or for substantial periods of time.
I have, at various times in my career, been somewhat surprised by assertions
on the part of some mathematicians to the eﬀect that travel should somehow be
forcedon mathematicians, i.e., to the eﬀect that some sort ofcoercionmay somehow
“override”the fundamental inequality“≫ ” that exists as a result of the circum-
stances in which a mathematician ﬁnds him/herself in. In my experience, although
this sort of coercion to travel may result in some sort of superﬁcial inﬂuence in
the very short term, it can never succeed in the long term. That is to say, the

===== PAGE 25 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 25
fundamental circumstancesthat give rise to thefundamental inequality“≫ ”c a n
never be altered by means of such coercive measures to travel [cf. the discussion of
[Rpt2014], (8)].
In this context, I was most impressed by the following twoconcrete examples,
which came to my attention recently. In describing these examples, I have often
used somewhat indirect expressions, in order to protect the privacy of the people
involved.
Example 1.9.1: The insuﬃciency of geographical proximity. This exam-
ple concerns the results obtained in a paper written in the fall of 2019 by a graduate
student (St1) from country (Ct1). This student (St1) showed his paper to a promi-
nent senior researcher (Pf1) at a university in country (Ct2) in a certain area of
number theory. The education and career of this researcher (Pf1) was conducted
entirely at universities in countries (Ct2), (Ct3), and (Ct4). This researcher (Pf1)
informed (St1) of his very positive evaluation of theoriginality o ft h er e s u l t so b -
tained in the paper by (St1). Another prominent senior researcher (Pf2) in a certain
area of number theory was informed by (Pf1) of the paper by (St1). This researcher
(Pf2), who works at a university in country (Ct2) in close physical proximity to
(Pf1), also took a generally positive position with regard to the paper by (St1).
On the other hand, several months subsequent to this interaction between (Pf1)
and (St1), a junior researcher (Pf3), who is originally from country (Ct5), but cur-
rently works at a university in country (Ct2) in close physical proximity to (Pf1)
and (Pf2), informed student (St1) [via e-mail contacts between (Pf3) and (St1)’s
advisor] that
the results of the paper by (St1) are in fact“well-known”and essen-
tially contained in papers published in the 1990’s by (Pf4),a
prominent senior researcher in country (Ct6).
[To be more precise, in fact the results of the paper by (St1) are not entirely
contained in the papers by (Pf4) in the sense that the paper by (St1) contains
certain numerically explicit estimates that are not contained in the papers by (Pf4).]
Country (Ct6) is in close physical proximity to country (Ct3), and in fact, one of
the research advisors of researcher (Pf4), when (Pf4) was a graduate student, was a
prominent researcher (Pf5) who is originally from country (Ct7), but has pursued
his career as a mathematician mainly in countries (Ct3) and (Ct6). Here, it should
be pointed out that (Pf1), (Pf2), and (Pf4) are very close in age, and that (Pf1)
received his undergraduate education in country (Ct3) at one of the universities
that played in prominent role in the career of (Pf5). The paper by student (St1)
concerns mathematics that has beenstudied extensively by — and indeed forms
one of thecentral themesof the research of — both (Pf1) and (Pf4), but fromvery
diﬀerent points of view,u s i n gvery diﬀerent techniques, since (Pf1) and (Pf4) work
in substantially diﬀerent areas of number theory. On the other hand, atno time
during the initial several months of interaction between (Pf1), (Pf2), and (St1)
was the work of (Pf4) mentioned. That is to say, (Pf1) and (Pf2) discussed the
results obtained in the paper by (St1) in a way that can only be explained by the
hypothesis that
(Pf1) and (Pf2) were, at the time,entirely unawareof the veryclose
relationship between the results obtained in the paper by (St1) and the

===== PAGE 26 =====

26 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
papers in the 1990’s by (Pf4).
— i.e., despite thenumerous opportunities aﬀorded byclose physical prox-
imity, as well as proximity of age, for substantial interaction between (Pf1) and
(Pf4). The paper by student (St1) is currently submitted for publication to a cer-
tain mathematical journal. Student (St1) recently received a referee’s report for
his paper, which apparently [i.e., judging from the comments made in the referee’s
r e p o r t ]w a sw r i t t e nb yam a t h e m a t i c i a nw o r k i n gi na na r e ao fn u m b e rt h e o r yc l o s e
to (Pf1). This referee’s report also makesno mention of the papers in the 1990’s
by (Pf4) and the fact that the results obtained in the paper by (St1) appear, with
the exception of certain numerically explicit estimates, to be essentially contained
in these papers of (Pf4). Finally, it should be mentioned that each oﬃcial language
of each of these countries (Ct1), (Ct2), (Ct3), (Ct4), (Ct5), (Ct6), (Ct7) belongs to
the European branch of the Indo-European family of languages, and that at least
six of the ten pairs of countries in the list (Ct2), (Ct3), (Ct4), (Ct6), (Ct7) share a
common oﬃcial language [i.e., with the other country in the pair].
Example 1.9.2
: The remarkable potency of mathematical proximity.This
example concerns the study of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory by a graduate stu-
dent (St2), who is originally from country (Ct8), but was enrolled in the doctoral
program in mathematics at a university in country (Ct9) under the supervision of a
senior faculty member (Pf6), who is originally from country (Ct10). This graduate
student (St2) began his study of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory as a graduate
student and continued his study during his years as a graduate student withes-
sentially no mathematical contactwith any researchers who are signiﬁcantly
involved with inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, except for his advisor (Pf6) and
one mid-career researcher (Pf7) from country (Ct11). Here, we remark that the
oﬃcial language of each of these countries (Ct8), (Ct9), (Ct10), (Ct11) belongs
to the European branch of the Indo-European family of languages. In particular,
with the exception of a few very brief e-mail exchanges with me and a brief two-
week long stay at RIMS in 2016 to participate in a workshop on IUT, this student
(St2) hadessentially no mathematical contact, prior to the fall of 2019, with
any researchers at Kyoto University who are involved with inter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory. Even in these circumstances,
this student was ablenot onlyto achieve avery technically sound un-
derstanding of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory on his own, by reading
[IUTchI-IV] and making use of various resources, activities, and contacts
within country (Ct9),but alsoto succeed, as a graduate student, in making
highly nontrivial original research contributionsto a certain mild
generalization of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, as well as to certain
related aspects of anabelian geometry.
My ﬁrst [i.e., with the exception of a few very brief e-mail exchanges prior to this]
mathematical contact with this student (St2) was in the fall of 2019. Although this
student (St2) initially had some technical questions concerning aspects of inter-
universal Teichm¨uller theory that he was unable to understand on his own, after a
few relatively brief discussions in person with me, he was able to ﬁnd answers to
these technical questions in a relatively short period of time [roughly a month or
two] without much trouble.

===== PAGE 27 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 27
§1.10. Mathematical intellectual property rights
The socio-political dynamics generated by the proliferation of logically
unrelated fabricated versionsof inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory — of which
RCS-IUT is perhaps the most frequently cited [cf. the discussion of§1.2, as well as
Examples 2.4.5, 2.4.7, 2.4.8 below] — and further fueled by
· grotesquely distorted mass media coverage and internet comments[cf.
the discussion of§1.8], as well as by
· the conspicuous absenceof detailed, explicit, mathematically substantive,
and readily accessible written expositionsof thelogical structureunderly-
ing the various central assertions of the proponents of such socio-political
dynamics [cf. the discussion of§1.5],
have had the eﬀect ofdeeply disrupting the normal process of absorption of
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory by the worldwide mathematical community. Left
unchecked, this state of aﬀairs threatens to pave the way for a ﬁeld — i.e., the ﬁeld
of mathematics — governed by socio-political dynamics[cf. the discussion
of (CmSn) in§1.5], rather than bymathematical content.
From a historical point of view, various forms ofinstitutional and concep-
tual infrastructure— such as the notions of
· a modern judiciary system;
· universal, inalienable human rights;
· the rule of law;
· due process of law;a n d
· burden of proof
— were gradually developed, precisely with the goal of averting the outbreak of the
sort ofsocio-political dynamics that were viewed as detrimental to society. In
this context, it is interesting to note thecentral roleplayed, for instance, incourts
of law, by the practice of producing
detailed, explicit, logically substantive,a n dreadily accessiblewritten doc-
umentation of thelogical structureunderlying the various central as-
sertions of the parties involved.
This situation is very much reminiscent of the situation inmathematics discussed in
§1.5[cf. alsothediscussionofRCS-IUTin §1.3!], i.e., whereweobservethatitis not
even possible to analyze or debate,i na n ys o r to fmeaningfully deﬁnitiveway,
mathematical assertions — such as, for instance, the historically famous assertion
of Fermat to the eﬀect that he had a proof of “Fermat’s Last Theorem”, but did not
write it down — in theabsence of suchwritten documentationof thelogical
structure of the issues under consideration.
From the point of view of the above discussion, it seems natural, in the case
of mathematics, to introduce, especially in the context of issues such as the one
discussed above involvinglogically unrelated fabricated versionsof inter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory, the notion ofmathematical intellectual property rights
[i.e., “MIPRs”]. As the name suggests, this notion is, in some sense, modeled on
the conventional notion ofintellectual property rightsassociated, for instance, with
trademarksor brand namesof corporations. In the case of this conventional notion,

===== PAGE 28 =====

28 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
intellectual property rights may be understood as a tool for protecting the“reli-
ability”or “creditworthiness”of trademarks or brand names of a corporation
from the sort ofsevere injuryto such trademarks or brand names that may ensue
from the proliferation ofshoddy third-party imitations of products produced
by the corporation. Here, we observe that this “severe injury” often revolves around
the creation ofsevere obstaclesto the execution of activities that play a central role
in theoperational normalcy of the corporation.
Unlike this conventional notion, MIPRs should be understood as being as-
sociated — not tocorporations or individuals for some ﬁnite period of time, but
rather — tomathematical notions and theories and, moreover, are ofunlim-
ited duration. The purpose of MIPRs may be understood as the protection of the
“creditworthiness”of such a mathematical notion or theory from thesevere
injury to the operational normalcy of mathematical progress related to no-
tion/theory that ensues from the proliferation oflogically unrelated fabricated
“fake” versionsof the notion/theory.
Before proceeding, we pause to consider one relatively elementary example of
this notion of MIPRs.
Example 1.10.1: The Pythagorean Theorem.
(i) Recall thePythagorean Theoremconcerning the length of the hypotenuse
of a right triangle in the Euclidean plane. Thus, if 0<x ≤ y<z ∈ R are the
lengths of the sides of a right triangle in the Euclidean plane, then the Pythagorean
Theorem states that
x2 +y2 = z2.
Various versions of this result apparently may be found not only in the writings
of ancient Greece and Rome, but also in Babylonian, ancient Indian, and ancient
Chinese documents. Well-known “elementary proofs”of this result may be ob-
tained, for instance, by computing, in various equivalent ways, theareaof suitable
planar regions covered by right triangles or squares that are closely related to the
given right triangle. On the other hand, such “elementary proofs” typicallydo not
address the fundamental issue of how todeﬁne such notions aslength, angle,a n d
rotation, i.e., which are necessary in order to understand theprecise contentof the
statement of the Pythagorean Theorem. Here, we observe that if, for instance, one
tries to deﬁne the notion of thelength of a line segment in Euclidean space in the
conventional way, then the Pythagorean Theorem reduces, in eﬀect, to ameaning-
less tautology! Moreover, although the notions oflength and angle may be deﬁned
once one has deﬁned the notion of arotation, it is by no means clear how to give
a natural deﬁnition of the notion of a rotation. For instance, one may attempt
to deﬁne the notion of arotation of Euclidean space as an element of the group
generated by well-known matrices involving sines and cosines, but it is by no means
clear that such a deﬁnition is“natural”or the“right deﬁnition”in some meaningful
sense. Thus, in summary,
it is by no means clear that such “elementary proofs” may be regarded as
genuine rigorous proofsin the sense of modern mathematics.
(ii) From a modern point of view, anatural, precise deﬁnitionof the funda-
mental notion of arotation of Euclidean space [from which, as observed in (i),

===== PAGE 29 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 29
natural deﬁnitions of the notions of the notions oflength and angle may be easily
derived] may be given by thinking in terms ofinvariant tensor forms associ-
ated to compact subgroups of [the topological groups determined by] various
general linear groups. From this modern point of view, theprecise formof the
Pythagorean Theorem [i.e., “x2 +y2 = z2”] — and, in particular, thesigniﬁcance
of the “2” in the exponent!— may be traced back to the theory ofBrauer groups
and the closely relatedlocal class ﬁeld theory of the archimedean ﬁeld “R”o f
real numbers, i.e., in short, to various fundamental properties of the arithmetic of
the topological ﬁeld “R”.
(iii) Considering the situation discussed in (i), (ii), it is by no means clear, in
any sort ofa priorior naive sense, just why the Pythagorean Theorem should take
theprecise form“x2+y2 = z2”. Indeed, sincethispreciseformofthePythagorean
Theorem continues to appearutterly mysteriouseven to numerous modern-day
high school students — i.e., who grow up immersed in an environment replete with
countless cultural links to modern mathematics, science, and technology! — it
seems reasonable to assume that it should have appearedall the more mysterious
to the individuals who populated the various ancient civilizations mentioned in (i).
In particular, it is by no means unnatural to consider the possibility that assertions
similar to the following assertions [stated relative to the notation introduced in (i)]
might have been made by some hypothetical individual at some time in human
history:
(Pyth1) “I don’t understand why the relation in the Pythagorean Theorem is of
the form ‘x2 +y2 = z2’, rather than ‘x2 ·y2 = z2’.”
(Pyth2) “I would like to investigate, in the context of the Pythagorean Theorem,
whether or not the relation ‘x2 ·y2 = z2’h o l d s . ”
(Pyth3) “I investigated, in the context of the Pythagorean Theorem, whether
or not the relation ‘x2 · y2 = z2’ holds and discovered that there exist
examples that show that this relation does not in fact hold in general.”
(Pyth4) “The Pythagorean Theorem is false for the following reason: The
Pythagorean Theorem states that ‘x2 · y2 = z2’, but there exist coun-
terexamples that show that this relation does not hold in general.”
(iv) From the point of view of the discussion given above of MIPRs, the asser-
tions (Pyth1), (Pyth2), (Pyth3) donot constitute aviolation of the MIPRs of the
Pythagorean Theorem, but rather are precisely the sorts of assertions/comments
that occur naturally in normal, sound research and educational activitiesin math-
ematics. By contrast,
(VioMIPR) (Pyth4) may be regarded as aclassical example of a violation of the
MIPRs of thePythagorean Theorem.
It is not diﬃcult to imagine
(DtrVio) the deeply detrimental eﬀectson the development of mathematics
throughout history that would have occurred ifviolations of MIPRs
similar to (Pyth4) regarding the Pythagorean Theorem arose and were
left unchecked.

===== PAGE 30 =====

30 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Moreover, in this context, it is important to observe that
(IgNoJst) assertions of ignorance of the technical details that one must un-
derstand in order to distinguish themodiﬁed versionof the Pythagorean
Theorem given in (Pyth4) from theoriginal version of the Pythagorean
Theorem donot by any means constitute ajustiﬁcation for participating
in theproliferation/citation/dissemination of (Pyth4).
That is to say,
(BurPrf) the burden of proof of establishing any sort of logical relationship
between such amodiﬁed version and the original version lies exclusively
in the hands of theproponents of the modiﬁed version
[cf. the discussion immediately following the present Example 1.10.1]. Indeed, this
notion ofburden of proof (BurPrf) constitutes afundamental pillar underlying
the notion of MIPRs and may be readily understood by considering the corre-
sponding [perhaps more familiar] situation surrounding the conventional notion of
intellectual property rightsas it is typically applied to technological devices such as
computers: that is to say, an assertion oftechnical ignoranceconcerning the details
of the internal technical structure of acomputer productmanufactured bycompany
A [or “A-product”for short] and acomputer productmanufactured bycompany X
[or “X-product”for short] doesnot by any means [i.e.,legal, ethical, or otherwise!]
justify the sale, by a [say, technically ignorant] computer dealer, of an X-product
advertised as anauthentic A-product.
(v) From a historical point of view, it appears to the author, in light of the
discussion of (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), to be in some sense a sort ofmiracle that the
Pythagorean Theorem was“discovered”in and, moreover,survived throughout
the duration of numerous ancient civilizations, i.e., despite the fact thatdictato-
rial, authoritarian political regimeswith little regard for such modern notions as a
judiciary system [in the modern sense],inalienable human rights,t h erule of law,
due process of law, burden of proof, and so on were by no means a rarity in the
ancient world. Of course, to a certain extent, this situation may be understood as
a consequence of the fact that the Pythagorean Theorem is closely related to the
task of direct measurementof lengths of various easily accessed [i.e., even in the
ancient world!] physical objects. From this point of view of “direct measurement”,
the “Pythagorean Theorem”, as understood in various ancient civilizations, should
perhaps be regarded [cf. the discussion of (i), (ii)] not so much as a result inmath-
ematics [in the modern sense of the term], but rather as aprincipally empirically
substantiated result inphysics. Nevertheless, even when viewed from this point of
view, it still seems like something of amiracle that this resultsurvived throughout
the duration of numerous ancient civilizations, unaﬀected by numerousmeaning-
less misunderstandingsof the sort discussed in (iii), (iv), especially considering that
similarly meaningless misunderstandings of the Pythagorean Theorem continue to
plague modern-day high school students!
Prior to the introduction above of the notion ofMIPRs, this notion does not
appear to have played an important role, at least in any sort ofexplicit sense, in
discussions or analyses of the development of mathematics. On the other hand,
Example 1.10.1 [cf., especially, Example 1.10.1, (iv)!] shows how, even at apurely
implicit level,

===== PAGE 31 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 31
this notion of MIPRs has in fact played afundamentally important
role in thedevelopment of mathematicsthroughout history.
Of course, in the case ofviolations of the MIPRs of a mathematical notion or
theory, conventional courts or judiciary systems are simply not equipped to play a
meaningful role in dealing with such violations, since this would require anexten-
sive technical knowledge and understanding, on the part of the judges or lawyers
involved, of themathematics under consideration. Indeed, it is useful to recall in
this context that
· traditionally, any detrimental eﬀects arising from suchviolations of the
MIPRs of a mathematical notion or theorywere typically averted in the
ﬁeld of mathematics by means of therefereeing systemsof various well
established mathematical journals;
· from the point of view of such traditional refereeing systems of well
established mathematical journals, theburden of proof regarding the
correctness of anynovel assertionsconcerning existing mathematical no-
tions or theories — such as, for instance, any assertions concerning some
sort oflogical relationship between amodiﬁed version of a theoryand
theoriginal version of the theory— lies [not with the author of the original
version of the theory (!), but rather] with theauthor of the manuscript
containing thenovel assertions.
On the other hand, as discussed in§1.8 [cf. also the discussion of§1.3], in the
case of the quiteegregious MIPRs violationsconstituted bylogically unrelated
fabricated versionsof inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, numerousmass media re-
ports and internet commentsreleased by individuals who are clearlynot operating
on the basis of asolid, technically accurate understandingof the mathematics in-
volved are regarded, in certain sectors of the mathematical community, as carrying
much more weightthan an exceptionally thorough refereeing process in a well es-
tablished mathematical journal by experts on the mathematics under consideration
[cf. the discussion of Example 1.5.2]. This state of aﬀairs isdeeply regrettableand
should be regarded as acause for alarm. Perhaps in the long term,new formsof
institutional or conceptual infrastructure may be developed for averting the
deeply detrimentaleﬀects of this sort of situation. At the time of writing, however,
it appears that
the only meaningful technical toolcurrently available to humanity for deal-
ing with this sort of situation lies in the production ofdetailed, explicit,
mathematically substantive, and readily accessiblewritten expositions
of thelogical structureunderlying the assertions of the various parties
involved [cf. the discussion surrounding (OvDlk) in§1.5, as well as the
discussion of §1.12 below],
i.e., evenwhensuchassertionsarepurportedtobea “matter of course”or“com-
mon sense”, that is to say, a matter that is soprofoundly self-evident that any
“decent, reasonable observer”would undoubtedly ﬁnd such written documentations
of logical structure to beentirely unnecessary [cf. the discussion surrounding
(CmSn) in §1.5]. From a historical point of view, suchwritten documentations of
logical structurecan then serve as a

===== PAGE 32 =====

32 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
valuable transgenerational or transcultural common core
of scholarly activity — a point of view that is reminiscent of thelogical relator
AND “∧”, which forms acentral themeof the present paper.
§1.11. Social mirroring of mathematical logical structure
Discussions, on the part of some observers, concerning the situation surround-
ing inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory are often dominated by variousmutually
exclusive and socially divisive/antagonistic dichotomies[cf. also the related
discussion of §1.8], i.e., such as the following:
(ExcDch) Is it the case that adherents of the RCS should be regarded asmath-
ematically correct/reliable/reasonable mathematicians, while mathemati-
cians associated with inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory shouldnot, OR
is it the other way around?
Here, the“OR”is typically understood as an“XOR”, i.e.,exclusive-or.T h a ti st o
say, such questions/dichotomies are typically understood as issues for which it can
never be the case that an“AND”relation between the two possible alternatives
under consideration holds. In discussions of mutually exclusive dichotomies such
as (ExcDch), mathematicians associated with inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory,
as well as the actual mathematical content of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory,
are often treated ascompletely and essentially disjoint entities, within the
international mathematical community, fromthemathematiciansandmathematical
research associated with the RCS.
In this context, it is interesting to note that this sort ofmutually exclusive
dichotomy is very much reminiscent of theessential logical structureof RCS-
IUT, which, as discussed in the latter portion of Example 2.4.5 below, may be
understoodasbeingessentiallylogicallyequivalentto OR-IUT,asw ellasto XOR-
IUT, i.e., to logically unrelated fabricated versionsof inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory in which the cruciallogical AND “∧”relation satisﬁed by the Θ-link of
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory is replaced by alogical OR “∨”relation or,
alternatively, by alogical XOR “˙∨”relation.
In fact, however,
(MthCnn) although it is indeed the case that theinternational mathematical com-
munity,a sw e l la st h emathematical contentof the research performed by
the international mathematical community, doesnot consist [in the lan-
guage of classical algebraic geometry] of asingle irreducible component,i t
is nevertheless undeniablyconnected.
Inthecaseofinter-universalTeichm¨ ullertheory, thisabundant inter-connectivity
may beexplicitly witnessedin the following aspects of the theory:
(IntCnn1) Themathematicalcontentofvariousaspectsofinter-universalTeichm¨ uller
theory is closely related to variousclassical theoriessuch as the following:
· the invariance of heights of abelian varietiesunder isogeny
[cf. the discussion of [Alien],§2.3, §2.4, as well as the discussion
of Example 3.2.1 below; the discussion of§3.5 below];

===== PAGE 33 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 33
· the classical proof in characteristic zero of thegeometric ver-
sion of theSzpiro inequalityvia theKodaira-Spencer morphism,
phrased in terms of the theory ofcrystals [cf. the discussion of
[Alien], §3.1, (v), as well as the discussion of§3.5, §3.10 below];
· Bogomolov’s proofover the complex numbers of thegeomet-
ric versionof theSzpiro inequality[cf. the discussion of [Alien],
§3.10, (vi)];
· classical complex Teichm¨uller theory [cf. the discussion
of Example 3.3.1 in§3.3 below];
· the classical theory of theJacobi identityfor thetheta func-
tion [cf. the discussion of Example 3.3.2 in§3.3 below];
· the classical theory of the computation of theGaussian inte-
gral via polar coordinates [cf. [Alien], §3.8].
We refer to [Alien],§4, for a more detailed discussion of such relationships
between inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory and various classical mathe-
matical theories.
(IntCnn2) In the context of the assertions of the RCS, it is important to recall [cf.
the discussion of (MthVl) in Example 2.4.5, (viii), below] that [perhaps
somewhat surprisingly!]
in fact there is in some senseno disagreement among any of
the parties involved with regard to themathematical validity
of the central mathematical assertions of the RCS
— i.e., so long as onedeletes the arbitrary label “inter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory”imposed by adherents of the RCS on the logi-
cally unrelated fabricated versions[i.e., RCS-IUT/OR-IUT/XOR-IUT] of
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory that typically appear in discussions of
adherents of the RCS [cf. the discussion of§1.2, §1.3, §1.8, §1.10].
The situation discussed in (InnCnn2) is of particular interest in the context of
the present paper since theessential logical structureof this situation discussed in
(InnCnn2) — i.e.,
(CmMth) of acommon mathematical understandingof themathematical va-
lidity of the various assertions under discussion, so long as one keeps track
of the
distinct labels “inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory”and “RCS-
IUT/OR-IUT/XOR-IUT”
—is remarkably similartothe essential logical structureofthesituationsurrounding
the central theme of the present paper, namely, the cruciallogical AND “ ∧”
property of the Θ-link in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory — cf. the discussion
of §2.4, §3.4 below. At a more elementary level, (CmMth) may be understood as
being qualitatively essentially thesame phenomenonas the phenomenon discussed
in Example 1.10.1, (iii), i.e., the distinction between (Pyth3) [where thedistinct

===== PAGE 34 =====

34 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
label “Pythagorean Theorem”is treated properly] and (Pyth4) [where thedistinct
label “Pythagorean Theorem”is not treated properly].
§1.12. Computer veriﬁcation, mathematical dialogue, and developmental
reconstruction
Onequestionthat is frequently posed, in the context of theentirely unnecessary
confusionthat results from the plethora ofmisinformation and false narratives
concerning inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory in the English-language mass media
and internet [cf. the discussion of§1.8, §1.10], is the following:
(CmpVer) Why not use computers to verify the mathematical validity of inter-
universal Teichm¨uller theory?
The implication here is that“computers”may be regarded as an entity inherently
endowed with a sort ofimpeccable neutrality/impartialitywith regard to the veriﬁ-
cation of mathematical assertions.
The fundamental problem with (CmpVer) lies in theessentially tautological
observation that
(Algor) no computer veriﬁcation algorithm for verifying some mathematical as-
sertion can yield a veriﬁcation of thevalidity of the algorithm itself,
i.e., of thepresumed relationshipbetween
· the mechanical outputyielded by the algorithm and
· the conventional human sense of “mathematical correctness”
— i.e., a relationship on whose integrity any sort of computer veriﬁcation
must be premised.
Of course, in situations where the issue raised in (Algor) is not an issue of concern
— i.e., such as situations involvingroutine numerical computationsor manipulation
of datain somerelatively simple combinatorial framework[such as a ﬁnite group, a
ﬁnite simplicial complex, or a ﬁnite chain of Boolean operators] — computer veriﬁ-
cation can indeed function as a meaningful tool for the veriﬁcation of mathematical
assertions.
On the other hand, in situations — such as the situation surrounding such
logically unrelated fabricated versions of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory
as RCS-IUT — in which the central issue lies [cf. the discussion of §1.2, §1.3,
§1.10, as well as Example 2.4.5, 2.4.7, 2.4.8, below] in theerroneous confusionof
such logically unrelated fabricated versionsof a theory with the original version
of the theory, computer veriﬁcations can never yield meaningful or substantive
progress, since the erroneous confusion of logically unrelated fabricated versions
of a theory with the original version of the theory completely invalidates,i na
very essential and inevitable way, the“presumed relationship”discussed in (Algor)
on which any sort of computer veriﬁcation of a mathematical assertion must be
premised. More elementary examples of this phenomenon oferroneous confusion
of logically unrelated fabricated versions of a theory with the original version of the
theory may be seen in
· the situation surrounding the assertion of Example 1.10.1, (iii), (Pyth4);
· the situation surrounding the [erroneous!] point of view described in

===== PAGE 35 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 35
Example 2.1.1 concerning the classical theory of integration on the real
line
—i.e., situationsthatarisefrom essentially non-mathematical [e.g., social/political/
psychological] circumstancesand, as a result, areclearly not amenable to resolution
via computer veriﬁcation.
In the context of (CmpVer), it is perhaps of interest to recall from the In-
troduction [cf. also the discussion at the beginning of§3.10] the point of view —
motivated by the well-knownfunctional completeness, in the sense ofpropositional
calculus, of the collection ofBoolean operatorsconsisting oflogical AND “∧”, logical
OR “∨”,a n dnegation “¬”— that one can, in principle, express
the essential logical structure of any mathematical argument or
theory in terms ofelementary logical relations, i.e., such aslogical
AND “∧”, logical OR “∨”,a n dnegation “¬”.
Indeed, it is precisely this point of view that formed thecentral motivation and
conceptual starting pointof the exposition given in the present paper concerning
the essential logical structureof inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, which may
be representedsymbolically as follows:
A ∧ B = A ∧ (B1 ˙∨ B2 ˙∨ ... )
=⇒ A ∧ (B1 ˙∨ B2 ˙∨ ... ˙∨ B′
1 ˙∨ B′
2 ˙∨ ... )
=⇒ A ∧ (B1 ˙∨ B2 ˙∨ ... ˙∨ B′
1 ˙∨ B′
2 ˙∨ ... ˙∨ B′′
1 ˙∨ B′′
2 ˙∨ ... )
...
That is to say, in summary:
(SymIUT) The symbolic representation [cf. the above display!] of the essen-
tial logical structureof inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory exposed in the
present paper may be understood as being, in some sense, the closest
realistic approachto the essential spirit of (CmpVer). Moreover, this
symbolic representation [cf. the above display!] is suﬃcientlysimple and
transparentthat, once it has been properly communicated,i tm a yb ev e r i -
ﬁed readily by mental computation in a matter of minuteswithout the use
of a computer!
Here, wenotethatthe relative simplicityofthis symbolic representationof(SymIUT)
is obtained as a result of organizing/compartmentalizing into“blackboxes”vari-
ous“blocks”of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory that consist ofanabelian geometry
or the theory of´etale theta functions, and whose validity has never arisen as a mat-
ter of discussion.
Ultimately, misunderstandings resulting from logically unrelated fabricated
versions can only be overcome by studying the original papers [IUTchI-IV] [cf.
also [Alien], as well as the present paper!] on inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory,
or, if this is not suﬃcient, by engaging inconstructive mathematical dialogue
with mathematicians who do have a substantial, accurate understanding of the
theory [cf. the discussion of §1.4, §1.5, §1.6]. Indeed, perhaps more to the point,

===== PAGE 36 =====

36 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
there appears to be aconspicuous tendency, in certain sectors of the mathematical
community, to
(RfsDlg) utilize the proliferation/citation of logically unrelated fabricated
versionsof the theory as a sort of“lame excuse”/subterfugeto justify
as t a n c eo frefusal to engage in such constructive mathematical dialogue
concerning the theory
—cf. thediscussionof §1.3, §1.10, especiallythediscussionof(VioMIPR),(DtrVio),
(IgNoJst), (BurPrf) in Example 1.10.1, (iv); the discussion of Examples 3.10.1,
3.10.2 below. Moreover,
(DngPrc) the situation described above in (RfsDlg), if leftunchecked, constitutes,
in the long-term, a dangerous precedent from the point of view of
maintaining a state ofoperational normalcyin the ﬁeld of mathematics
in a fashion consistent with such fundamental democratic principles as the
rule of law, due process of law,a n dburden of proof
— cf. the discussion of §1.10, especially the discussion of (VioMIPR), (DtrVio),
(IgNoJst), (BurPrf) in Example 1.10.1, (iv).
Nevertheless, in this context, it is also of fundamental importance to recall
(OvrMs) the existence of numerous mathematicians [of many diverse nationali-
ties!] who were indeed successful inovercoming various meaningless
misunderstandings concerning inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory pre-
cisely by persistently engaging inconstructive mathematical dialogue
concerning the theory.
Such dialogues typically involve the painstaking and time-consuming process of
(ExplLS) sifting through and analyzing the assertions of the mathematician in
question concerning inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory in order to make
precise and explicit the exact content of thelogical structure under-
lying such assertions[cf. the discussion of§1.5, especially Examples 1.5.1,
1.5.2].
Ontheotherhand, itisimportanttoemphasizethatsucheﬀorts, whenseenthrough
to their conclusion, have always led to a situation in which the mathematician in
question realizes his/her misunderstandings of the theory and ultimately concedes
that, at least so far as he/she can see,
(MthVlTh) there is indeedno mathematical reason to deny the mathematical
validityof the theory.
That is to say, this chain of events is precisely the chain of events that should be
expected from any constructive mathematical dialogue carried out in a suitable,
sincere, and rational fashion concerning a rigorously formulated mathematical the-
ory.
Thus, in summary, at least in a direct, literal sense,ultimately, the only way
to overcome meaningless misunderstandingsof the theory that arise fromlogically
unrelated fabricated versions of the theoryis to
(CfrMth) directly confrontthe mathematical contentof the original theory,
either

===== PAGE 37 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 37
· by studying theoriginal papers[IUTchI-IV] [cf. also [Alien], as
well as the present paper!] on inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory,
or, if this is not suﬃcient,
· by engaging inconstructive mathematical dialoguewith mathe-
maticians who do have a substantial, accurate understanding of
the theory.
[cf. the discussion of§1.3, §1.10, as well as Examples 3.10.1, 3.10.2 below].
Conversely,
(BlkAcc) a stance of systematic and institutionally endorsed refusal to confront
the mathematical content of the original theoryhas the eﬀect of orches-
trating the creation of a sort of artiﬁcialblackhole relative to the issue of
mathematical accountability[cf. the discussion of [EMSCOP] in§1.3]
and leads to the sort ofabsurd pathologies and obstructions to the
operational normalcyof the ﬁeld of mathematics discussed in detail in
§1.10 [cf., especially, Example 1.10.1, (iii), (Pyth4)].
That is to say, unlike theIUT community, which bearsactive mathematical
responsibility for the mathematical content of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory
in thelong-term by maintaining an extensive, sustainedinfrastructural appa-
ratus of mathematical activities surrounding inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory —
such as
· workshops, of one to two weeks in length, concerning inter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory [e.g., at RIMS in March 2015, in Oxford in Decem-
ber 2015, at RIMS in July 2016, and at RIMS in September 2021] and
numerous lecture series[e.g., in Kumamoto in May 2014, at RIMS in De-
cember 2015, in Yokohama in November 2018, and at RIMS in December
2021], which have led to a quite substantial stock ofwidely and readily ac-
cessible PDF ﬁles of slidesand videos of lecturesexposing inter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory;
· extensive one-to-one mathematical discussionsbetween mathematicians
all over the world concerning inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory viae-mail
and online video meetings;
· joint research projects concerning the further development of inter-
universal Teichm¨uller theory [cf., e.g., [ExpEst]]
— the author remains entirely unable, despite years of intensive eﬀort[cf. the
discussion of §1.3, §1.5, §1.6], to locate even a single mathematicianwho is will-
ing to bear
active responsibilityfor themathematical contentof RCS-IUT
by engaging in similar mathematical activities/mathematical dialogue. Thefun-
damental qualitative diﬀerenceconstituted by this egregrious absence of an
infrastructural apparatus supporting the assertions of the RCS — that is to say,
put another way, this sort of“hit-and-run”/“dead-end”approach to making
vaguely formulated mathematical assertions that are not supported by detailed
documentation/exposition apparatuses, i.e., inviolation of the [EMSCOP] [cf. the
discussion of the [EMSCOP] in§1.3] — is precisely what is meant by the notion of
a “blackhole”of mathematical accountabilitydiscussed in (BlkAcc).

===== PAGE 38 =====

38 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Ontheotherhand, fromamore long-term, historical point of view, itisperhaps
of interest to observe that there is another approach to witnessing the validity of a
mathematical theory, namely,
(DvpRcn) theapproachof developmental reconstruction, i.e., of“reconstructing
the validity”of a mathematical theory by witnessing the subsequent
developments that ensue from the theory.
This point of view is particularly of interest in the context of inter-universal Te-
ichm¨uller theory, given thecentral roleplayed in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory
by anabelian geometry, i.e., which revolves around the development ofrecon-
struction algorithmsthat allow one to reconstructconventional algebraic struc-
tures [i.e., of the sort that typically appear in algebraic/arithmetic geometry] from
more primitive combinatorial structuressuch as topological groups.
This approach ofdevelopmental reconstructionmay be applied, for instance, to
the task of evaluating the level of mathematical or scientiﬁc development ofancient
civilizations, i.e.,notvia the direct study of detailed theoretical expositions [which
are typicallynot readily available— cf. the discussion of§1.5!] of the mathematics
or science understood by such an ancient civilization, but rather by observing what
may be understood as the“fruits”of this mathematics or science, e.g., in the form
of architectural achievementssuch as the famous
· pyramids of Egyptor
· Nazca linesand mysterious ruins of Puma Punkuin South Amer-
ica.
Another important [though non-architectural!] example of this sort of phenomenon
may be seen in
· the list of Pythagorean triples in the famous Babylonian tablet
Plimpton 322
—i.e., whichis particularly notableinthatitstronglysuggests[thatistosay, despite
the fact that it is not accompanied by any sort ofexplicit theoretical exposition!]
an understanding ofalgebraic manipulationon a par with the essential content of
Example 1.12.1 below.
Example 1.12.1: Explicit parametrization of Pythagorean triples. The
set of integral solutions— i.e., solutions in the ring of integersZ,a l s ok n o w na s
Pythagorean triples—oftheequation x2+y2 = z2 maybeparametrizedbyapplying
the substitutions x
z ↦→ u, y
z ↦→ v and considering the set ofrational solutions —
i.e., solutions in the ﬁeld of rational numbersQ — of the equationu2 + v2 =1 .
The solutions of this last equationu2 +v2 =1i n Q — or, indeed, in any ﬁeld of
characteristic ̸=2—m a yb ecompletely parametrizedby the substitutions
u ↦→ t2−1
t2+1,v ↦→ 2t
t2+1
— where we observe that
(
t2−1
t2+1
)2
+
(
2t
t2+1
)2
=1 ,t = v
1−u = u+1
v =
{(
t2−1
t2+1
)
+1
}
·
(
2t
t2+1
)−1
,

===== PAGE 39 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 39
2 ·
(
t+ 1
t
)−1
=2 ·
(
u+1
v + v
u+1
)−1
=2 ·
(
(u+1)2+v2
v(u+1)
)−1
=2 ·
(
u2+v2+1+2u
v(u+1)
)−1
=2 ·
(
2(u+1)
v(u+1)
)−1
= v
That is to say, thisparametrization byt [for t such thatt2 +1 ̸=0 ]g i v e sacomplete
list of all solutions of the equationu2 + v2 =1[ f o ru such that u − 1 ̸=0 ]i n
any ﬁeld of characteristic̸= 2 [or, indeed, by interpreting “̸= 0” as a condition of
invertibility, in any ring in which 2 is invertible].
On the other hand, in this context, it is of interest to note that, at least as of
the time of writing of the present paper,
(AncBas) no ancient civilization has produced evidence of knowledge of the equation
∑∞
n=1
1
n2 = π2
6
— i.e., of the solution of the so-calledBasel problem.
That is to say, here we note that this observation (AncBas) isvalid despite the fact
that each of theessential componentsof this equation — i.e.,
· the positive integers of “suﬃciently large value”,
· the elementary operations ofaddition/multiplication/division,
· t h en o t i o no ft h elength of the circumference of a circle of radius1, and
· the idea of a sum of [real] numbers comingarbitrarily close, up to a very
small margin of error,to another [real] number
— may be readilyexpressed in terms understandable to many advanced ancient
civilizations. Of course, the discovery of an ancient civilization that produced
evidence of some sort of knowledge of the equation in the display of (AncBas)
would be quitestartling since it would strongly suggest [that is to say, even if it
is not accompanied by any sort ofexplicit theoretical exposition!] an understanding
of numerousideas and theoremsnot only from elementary diﬀerential and integral
calculus, but also possibly fromFourier analysis on the circleand complex
analysis on the complex plane.
Finally, we return to our discussion of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory. In
the case of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, the phenomenon ofdevelopmental
reconstruction may already be seen, albeit in a relatively weak sense, in thenu-
merical resultsof [ExpEst]. Stronger examples of this phenomenon may be seen,
however, in variousenhanced versionsof inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory that
are currently under development, which are expected to give rise to various new
types of applications of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory. Such enhanced versions
suggest strongly that the original version of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory given
in [IUTchI-IV] [cf. also [Alien], as well as the present paper!] should perhaps be
regarded as being only the ﬁrst example of a much larger collection of examples
of “anabelian ad`elic analysis”, i.e., in the spirit of the point of view that the

===== PAGE 40 =====

40 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
various types ofprime-strips that occur in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory may
be thought of [cf. the discussion at the end of [Alien], §3.3, (iv)] as a sort of
anabelian/monoid-theoretic version of the classical notion ofad`eles/id`eles that ap-
pears throughout conventional arithmetic geometry and number theory. Here, we
observe that this term“anabelian ad`elic analysis”is of interest from ahistorical
point of viewin that it encapsulates, in a perhaps surprisingly eﬃcient fashion, a
quite substantial portion of thehistorical development of arithmetic geometrythat
underlies signiﬁcant portions of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory: indeed,
(AAA0) the non-holomorphic (!) “analysis”on the real linesurrounding Eu-
ler’s formula [cf. the discussion of §1.5], Euler’s solution of the Basel
problem [cf. the discussion above of (AncBas)], thegamma function,a n d
the Gaussian integral[also known as theEuler-Poisson integral—c f .a l s o
the discussion of [Alien],§3.8] — i.e., analysis of the sort practiced during
the 18-th centuryby such mathematicians asEuler and theBernoullis
— may be understood as a sort ofessential preparatory phasethat paved
the way for theholomorphic analysis/function theory of the 19-th century
discussed in (AAA1), below, surrounding thetheta and zeta functions[as
well as thecomplex logarithm— cf. the discussion of§1.5];
(AAA1) at a more genuine/non-preparatory level,“analysis”may be regarded
as referring to the classical complex function theory — pioneered
by such19-th centurymathematicians asJacobi, Riemann,a n dMellin
— on the complex plane/upper half-plane surrounding the well-known
functional equationsof thetheta functionand theRiemann zeta function,
which are related via theMellin transform[cf. the discussion of§1.5];
(AAA2) “ad`elic”may be understood as referring to thead`elization — devel-
oped by such 20-th century mathematicians as Chevalley, Weil, Iwa-
sawa, Artin, Tate,a n dLanglands — of the classical complex function
theory of (AAA1), a development which led, in particular, to the well-
known ad`elic proof of thefunctional equationof theDedekind zeta function
[originally due toHecke] and subsequently to therepresentation-theoretic
approachof theLanglands program;
(AAA3) “anabelian”may be interpreted as referring to the“anabelianiza-
tion”of theclassical functional equation of the theta function on the up-
per half-planein the fashion ofinter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, i.e., by
relating Galois groups/arithmetic fundamental groupsto ring/ﬁeld theory
— not via representation theory, as in (AAA2) (!), but rather — by ap-
plying cyclotomic rigidity isomorphismsand Kummer theoryto relate the
´etale-like objects constructed by means ofanabelian algorithms to their
Frobenius-likecounterparts arising from ring/ﬁeld theory.
Thus, (AAA2) may be understood as an approach to the“arithmetization”of
the classical function theory of (AAA1) by means ofad`elization/representation
theory, i.e., by thinking, in short, of thead`eles as a new domain [i.e., more pre-
cisely, locally compact topological space of uncountable cardinality] in which to
conduct analysis/function theory. By contrast, (AAA3) may be interpreted as
an approach to the“arithmetization”of the classical function theory of (AAA1)
by thinking of theabstract topological groupsthat arise asabsolute Galois

===== PAGE 41 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 41
groups/arithmetic fundamental groupsas the natural domain [i.e., more pre-
cisely, locally compact topological space of uncountable cardinality] for conducting
analysis/function theory. Thus, in summary, at the level ofnatural domains for
conducting the analysis/function theory surrounding the theta/zeta functions,o n e
can discern afascinating historical progression
(AAA0) ⇝ (AAA1) ⇝ (AAA2) ⇝ (AAA3)
corresponding to
R ⇝ C ⇝ ad`eles ⇝ arithmetic fundamental groups.
In closing, we note that, in some sense, this interpretation of (AAA3) is consistent
withthe spiritofGrothendieck’s anabelian philosophyasan approachto diophantine
geometry via anabelian geometry, although, as discussed in [IUTchI],§I5, whereas
Grothendieck apparently envisaged this approach as centering around theSection
Conjecture, the anabelian geometry that actually appears in inter-universal Te-
ichm¨uller theory consists mainly ofabsolute anabelian geometryover number
ﬁelds and p-adic local ﬁelds.
Section 2: Elementary mathematical aspects of “redundant copies”
The essence of the central mathematical assertions of the RCS revolves, per-
haps somewhat remarkably, aroundquite elementary considerationsthat lie well
within the framework of undergraduate-level mathematics. Before examining, in§3,
the assertions of the RCS in the technical terminology of inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory, we pause to give a detailed exposition of these elementary considerations.
§2.1. The history of limits and integration
The classical notion ofintegration [e.g., for continuous real-valued functions
on the real line], as well as the more fundamental, but closely related notion of a
limit, have a long history, dating back [at least] to the 17-th century. Initially,
these notions did not have rigorous deﬁnitions, i.e., were not“well-deﬁned”,i nt h e
sense understood by mathematicians today. The lack of such rigorous deﬁnitions
frequently led, up until around the end of the 19-th century, to“contradictions”
or “paradoxes”in mathematical work — such asGrandi’s series
∞∑
n=0
(−1)n
— concerning integrals or limits.
Ultimately, of course, the theory of limits and integrals evolved, especially
during the period starting from around the mid-19-th century and lasting until
around the early 20-th century, to the extent that such“contradictions/paradoxes”
couldberesolvedinadeﬁnitiveway. Thisprocessof evolutioninvolved, forinstance,
inthecaseofintegration, ﬁrsttheintroductionofthe Riemann integralandlaterthe
introduction of theLebesgue integral, which made it possible to integrate functions

===== PAGE 42 =====

42 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
— such as, for instance, theindicator function o nt h er e a ll i n eo ft h esubset of
rational numbers— whose Riemann integral is not well-deﬁned.
Here, it should be noted that at various key points during thisevolution of the
notions of limits and integration, the central“contradictions/paradoxes”that, at
times, led to substantial criticism and confusion arose from asolid, technically
accurate understandingof the content and logical structure of the assertions —
suchas, forinstance, variouspossibleapproachestocomputingthevalueofGrandi’s
series — at the center of these “contradictions/paradoxes”. It is precisely for this
reason that such criticism and confusion ultimately lead to substantive reﬁnements
in the theory that were suﬃcient to resolve the original “contradictions/paradoxes”
in a deﬁnitive way.
Such constructive episodes in the history of mathematics—w h i c hm a y
be studied by scholars today precisely because of the existence ofdetailed,
explicit, mathematically substantive, and readily accessible written records!
[cf. the discussion of§1.5] — stand instark contrastto [cf. the discussion
of (UndIg) in§1.3] criticism of a mathematical theory that is based on a
fundamental ignoranceof the content and logical structure of the the-
ory, such as the following“false contradiction”in the theory of integration,
which may be observed in some students who are still in an initial stage
with regard to their study of the notion of integration.
Example 2.1.1: False contradiction in the theory of integration.Consider
the following computation of the deﬁnite integral of a real-valued function on the
real line ∫ 1
0
xn dx = 1
n+1
for n a positive integer. Suppose that one takes the [drastically oversimpliﬁed and
manifestly absurd, from the point of view of any observer who has an accurate
understanding of the theory of integration!] point of view that themost general
possible interpretation of the equation of the above display is one in which the
following threesymbols
“
∫ 1
0
”, “x”, “dx”
are allowed to bearbitrary positive real numbersa, b, c. Here, we note that in the
case of “dx”, such a substitution “dx ↦→ c”c o u l db e“justiﬁed”by quotingconven-
tional “ϵ-δ” treatmentsof the theory of limits and integrals, in whichinﬁnitesimals
— i.e., such as “dx”o r“ϵ”—a r ea l l o w e dt ob earbitrary positive real numbers,
which are regarded as being“arbitrarily small”, and observing that any positive
real numberc is indeed much smaller than “most other positive real numbers” [such
as 1000 · c, etc.]. On the other hand, by substituting the valuesn =1 ,2,3, one
obtains relations
abc =1 , ab2c = 1
2, ab3c = 1
3.
The ﬁrst two of these relations imply thatb = 1
2 [so b2 = 1
4], while the ﬁrst and
third relations imply thatb2 = 1
3 ̸= 1
4 —a “contradiction”!

===== PAGE 43 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 43
§2.2. Derivatives and integrals
In the context of the historical discussion of integration in§2.1, it is interesting
to recall thefundamental theorem of calculus, i.e., the result to the eﬀect that,
roughly speaking, the operations ofintegrationand diﬀerentiationof functions [i.e.,
real-valued functions on the real line satisfying suitable conditions] areinverse to
one another. Thus, from a certain point of view,
the “essential information”contained in afunction may be understood as
being “essentially equivalent”to the“essential information”contained
in thederivative of the function
— that is to say, since one may always go back and forth at will between a function
and its derivative by integrating and then diﬀerentiating. This point of view might
then tempt some observers to conclude that
any mathematical proof that relies, in an essential way, on consideration
of the derivative of a function must be fundamentally ﬂawed since any
information that might possibly be extracted from the derivative of the
function should already be available [cf. the“essential equivalence”dis-
cussed above] from the function prior to passing to the derivative, i.e., in
“contradiction”to the essential dependence of the proof on passing to the
derivative.
Alternatively, this point of view may be summarized in the following way:
the “essential equivalence”discussed above implies that any usage, in a
mathematical proof, of the derivative of a function is necessarily inherently
redundant in nature.
In fact, of course, such “pseudo-mathematical reasoning” is itselffundamen-
tally ﬂawed. Two examples of well-known proofs in arithmetic geometry that
depend, in a essential way, on passing to the derivative will be discussed in the
ﬁnal portion of§3.2 below [cf. (InvHt), (FrDﬀ)]. These examples are in factclosely
related to the mathematics that inspiredinter-universal Teichm¨uller theory [cf. the
discussion in the ﬁnal portion of§3.2 below]. One central aspect of the situations
discussed in §3.2 below is the exploitation of properties of [various more abstract
analogues of] thederivative of a function[cf., e.g., the discussion of Example 3.2.1,
(vii), below] thatdiﬀer,i nav e r ysubstantive, qualitativeway, from the prop-
erties of the original function. One important example of this sort of situation is
the validity/invalidity of varioussymmetry properties. This phenomenon may
be observed in the following elementary example.
Example 2.2.1: Symmetry properties of derivatives.
(i) The real-valued function
f(x)= x
o nt h er e a ll i n ei snot invariant [i.e., not symmetric] with respect to translations
by an arbitrary constantc ∈ R. That is to say, in general, it is not the case that
f(x+c)= f(x). On the other hand, the derivative

===== PAGE 44 =====

44 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
f′(x)=1
of this function ismanifestly invariant/symmetricwith respect to such trans-
lations.
(ii) One variant of the discussion of (i) is the following example, which, in some
sense, illustrates theessential spiritof diﬀerential and integral calculus.C o n s i d e r ,
for some positive integern and positive real numberλ, a real-valued functionf :
{0,1,...,n }→ R on the set of nonnegative integers≤ n such that, for eachi ∈
{0,1,...,n − 1},
|f(i+1) − f(i)|≤ λ.
Then one mayapproximatef(n)i nt e r m so ff(0) —not (!) byarbitrarily identi-
fying the elements 0,n ∈{ 0,1,...,n } or the elementsf(0),f (n) ∈ R, but rather —
by adding up thepossible variationsof the functionf as one gradually increases
i from 0 ton as follows:
|f(n) − f(0)|≤ n ·λ.
This very elementary example may be understood as afaithful representation of
the [againvery elementary!] set-theoretic foundational apparatusunderlying inter-
universal Teichm¨uller theory [cf. the discussion surrounding (Englf) in§3.10 below].
That is to say, the“possible variations”in the above discussion correspond to the
“fuzziﬁcations”—i.e., indeterminacies—thatappearinthediscussionsurrounding
(Englf) in §3.10 below, while thevalues “f(0)”, “f(n)” [or, alternatively, “f(n)”,
“f(0)”, if one prefers!] correspond, respectively, to thelog-volumes of the q-pilot
and Θ-pilot objects in the codomain and domain of the Θ-link of inter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory.
§2.3. Line segments vs. loops
By comparison to the examples given in§2.1, §2.2, the followingelementary
geometric examples are much moreclosely technically relatedto the assertions of
the RCS concerning inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory.
Example 2.3.1: Endpoints of an oriented line segment.
(i) Write
I
def
=[ 0,1] ⊆ R
for theclosed unit interval[i.e., the set of nonnegative real numbers≤ 1] in the real
line R.T h u s ,I is equipped with a naturaltopology [i.e., induced by the topology
of R], hence can be regarded as atopological space, indeed more speciﬁcally, as a
one-dimensional topological manifold with boundarythat is equipped with a natural
orientation [i.e., induced by the usual orientation ofR]. Write
α
def
= {0},β
def
= {1}
for the topological spaces [consisting of a single point!] determined by the two
endpoints of I.T h u s ,αand βare isomorphic as topological spaces. In certain

===== PAGE 45 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 45
situations that occur in category theory, it is often customary to replace a given
category by a full subcategory called askeleton,w h i c hi sequivalent to the given
category, but also satisﬁes the property that any two isomorphic objects in the
skeleton are equal. This point of view of working with skeletal categories [i.e.,
categories which are their own skeletons] is motivated by the idea thatnonequal
isomorphic objectsare “redundant”. Of course, there are indeed various situations
in which nonequal isomorphic objects are redundant in the sense that working
with skeletal categories, as opposed to arbitrary categories, does not result in any
substantive diﬀerence in the mathematics under consideration.
(ii) On the other hand, if, in the present discussion ofI, α, β— which one
may visualize as follows
I
•——>——•
αβ
—o n eidentiﬁes αand β, then one obtains anew topological space,t h a ti st os a y ,
more speciﬁcally, anoriented one-dimensional topological manifold[whose orienta-
tion is induced by the orientation ofI]
L
def
= I/⟨α∼ β⟩
that is homeomorphic to the unit circle, i.e., may be visualized as aloop.W r i t e
γL ⊆ L for the image ofα⊆ I, or, equivalently,β⊆ I,i n L. As is well-known
from elementary topology, the topological spaceL is structurally/qualitatively very
diﬀerentfrom the topological spaceI. For instance, whereas I has a trivial fun-
damental group, L has anontrivial fundamental group[isomorphic to the additive
group of integersZ]. In particular,
it is by no meansthe case that the fact thatαand βare isomorphic as
topological spaces implies a sort of“redundancy”to the eﬀect that any
mathematical argument involvingI [cf. the above observation concerning
fundamental groups!] is entirely equivalentto a corresponding math-
ematical argument in whichαand βare identiﬁed, i.e., in which “I”i s
replacedby “L”.
(iii) In this context, we observe that the [one-dimensional oriented topological
manifold with boundary] I does not admit any symmetries that switch αand
β. Moreover, even if one passes to the quotientI ↠ L, the [one-dimensional ori-
ented topological manifold]L does not admit any symmetries that reverse the
orientation of L.
Example 2.3.2: Gluing of adjacent oriented line segments.
(i) A similar elementary geometric situation to the situation discussed in Ex-
ample 2.3.1, but which is technically a bit more similar to the situation that arises
in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory may be given as follows. We begin withtwo
distinct copies †I, ‡I of I.T h u s ,†I has endpoints †α, †β[i.e., corresponding re-
spectively to the endpointsα, βof I]; similarly,‡I has endpoints ‡α, ‡β.W et h e n

===== PAGE 46 =====

46 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
proceed to form anew topological spaceJ by gluing †I to ‡I via theunique isomor-
phism of topological spaces†β
∼
→ ‡α.T h u s ,†βand ‡αare identiﬁed in J.L e tu s
write γJ for the one-pointed topological space obtained by identifying†βand ‡α.
Thus, J may be visualized as follows:
†I ‡I
•——>——•——>——•
†αγ J ‡β
(ii) Observe that the gluing operation that gave rise toJ is such that we may
regard †I and ‡I as subspaces †I ⊆ J, ‡I ⊆ J of J. Since each of these subspaces
†I, ‡I of J is naturally isomorphic toI, one may take the point of view, as in the
discussion of Example 2.3.1, that these two subspaces are“redundant”and hence
should beidentiﬁed with one another [say, via the natural isomorphisms of†I, †I
with I]t of o r manew topological space
M
def
= J/⟨†I ∼ ‡I⟩
— where we observe that the natural isomorphisms of†I, †I with I determine a
natural isomorphismof topological spacesM
∼
→ L = I/⟨α∼ β⟩,w i t ht h eloop L
considered in Example 2.3.1. WriteγM ⊆ M for the image ofγJ ⊆ J in M.T h u s ,
the natural isomorphismM
∼
→ L maps γM isomorphically onto γL. On the other
hand, just as in the situation discussed in Example 2.3.1,
it isby no meansthe case that the fact that†I and ‡I are [in fact, natu-
rally] isomorphic as topological spaces implies a sort of“redundancy”to
the eﬀect that any mathematical argument involvingJ is entirely equiv-
alent to a corresponding mathematical argument in which†I and ‡I are
identiﬁed [say, via the natural isomorphisms of†I, †I with I], i.e., in
which “J”i sreplacedby “M”.
Indeed, for instance, one veriﬁes immediately, just as in the situation of Exam-
ple 2.3.1, that the fundamental groups ofJ and M are not isomorphic.T h a t i s
to say, just as in the situation of Example 2.3.1, the topological spaceJ is struc-
turally/qualitatively very diﬀerentfrom the topological spaceM.
§2.4. Logical AND “∧” vs. logical OR “∨”
The essential mathematical content of theelementary geometric examplesdis-
cussed in §2.3 may be reformulated in terms of thesymbolic logical relatorsAND
“∧”a n dO R“∨”. This reformulation renders the elementary geometric examples
of §2.3 in a form that is even moredirectly technically relatedto various central
aspects of the assertions of the RCS concerning inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory.
Example 2.4.1:“ ∧”v s .“∨” for adjacent oriented line segments.
(i) Recall the situation discussed in Example 2.3.2. Thus,J ⊇ †I ⊇ †β= γJ =
‡α⊆ ‡I ⊆ J, i.e.,

===== PAGE 47 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 47
(AOL1) the following conditionholds:
(
γJ = †β⊆ †I
)
∧
(
γJ = ‡α⊆ ‡I
)
.
On the other hand, if oneidentiﬁes †I, ‡I, then one obtains a topological space
M
∼
→ L, i.e., aloop. Here, “
∼
→ ” denotes thenatural isomorphismdiscussed in
Example 2.3.2, (ii). Now suppose that we are given a connected subspace
γI ⊆ I
whose image in the quotientI ↠ L = I/⟨α∼ β⟩ coincides with γL ⊆ L, i.e., with
the image ofγJ ⊆ J via the composite of the quotientJ ↠ M = J/⟨†I ∼ ‡I⟩ with
the natural isomorphismM
∼
→ L.T h e nobserve that
(AOL2) the following conditionholds: γI ∈{ α,β}, i.e.,
(
γI = β⊆ I
)
∨
(
γI = α⊆ I
)
.
Of course,
(AOL3) the essential mathematical content discussed in this condition (AOL2)
may beformally described as a condition involving theAND relator“∧”:
(
β∈{ α,β}
)
∧
(
α∈{ α,β}
)
.
But the essential mathematical content of theOR relator“∨” statement in (AOL2)
remains unchanged.
(ii) On the other hand, [unlike the case withγJ!]
(AOL4) the following condition doesnot hold:
(
γI = β⊆ I
)
∧
(
γI = α⊆ I
)
.
That is to say, in summary, the operation ofidentifying †I, ‡I — e.g., on the
grounds of“redundancy”[cf. the discussion of Example 2.3.2] — has the eﬀect
of passing from a situation in which
the AND relator“∧” holds [cf. (AOL1)]
to a situation in which
the OR relator“∨” holds [cf. (AOL2), (AOL3)],but
the AND relator“∧”d o e snot hold [cf. (AOL4)]!
(iii)Itturnsoutthatthisphenomenon—i.e., ofanidentiﬁcationof“redundant
copies” leading to a passage from thevalidity of an “∧”r e l a t i o nt ot h evalidity of

===== PAGE 48 =====

48 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
an “∨” relation coupled with theinvalidity of an “∧”r e l a t i o n—f o r m savery
precise modelof the situation that arises in the assertions of the RCS concerning
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory [cf. the discussion of§3.2, §3.4 below].
Example 2.4.2: Diﬀerentials on oriented line segments.
(i) In the situation of Example 2.4.1, one way to understand the gap between
(AOL1) and (AOL4) — i.e., thecentral issueof whether theAND relator“∧”holds
or doesnot hold— is to think in terms of the restriction toI ⊆ R of thecoordinate
function “x” of Example 2.2.1, (i). Indeed,
(AOD1) one may interpret (AOL4) as the statement that the coordinate functions
“x” on the two copies†I, ‡I that constitute J do not glue togetherto
form a single, well-deﬁnedR-valued function onJ [that is to say, since it
is not clear whether the value of such a function onγJ ⊆ J should be 0 or
1, i.e., such a function isnot well-deﬁned on γJ ⊆ J];
(AOD2) on the other hand, (AOL1) may be interpreted as the statement that
such a function [i.e., obtained bygluing togetherthe coordinate functions
“x”o nt h et w oc o p i e s†I, ‡I that constituteJ] can indeed be deﬁnedif
one regards its values as being [not in asingle copyof R, but rather] in
the set †,‡R obtained by gluing togethertwo distinct copies†R, ‡R of R
by identifying †1 ∈ †R with ‡0 ∈ ‡R.
(ii) On the other hand, if, instead of considering the coordinate function “x”,
one considers thediﬀerential“dx” associated to this coordinate function [cf. the
discussion of Example 2.2.1, (i)], then one observes immediately that
(AOD3) the diﬀerentials“dx”o nt h et w oc o p i e s†I, ‡I that constitute J do
indeed glue togetherto form a single, well-deﬁned diﬀerential onJ that,
moreover, iscompatible with the quotientJ ↠ M = J/⟨†I ∼ ‡I⟩ in the
sense that, as is easily veriﬁed, it arises as the pull-back, via this quotient
mapJ ↠ M, of a [smooth] diﬀerential on the [smooth manifold constituted
by the] loopM.
Note, moreover, that the gluings and compatibility of (AOD3) may be achieved
without considering functions or diﬀerentials valued in some sort of complicated
[i.e., by comparison toR!] set such as†,‡R.
(iii) It turns out [cf. the discussion of Example 2.4.1, (iii)] that the phenomenon
discussed in (AOD3) isclosely relatedto the situation that arises in inter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory [cf. the discussion of§3.2 below].
Example 2.4.3: Representation via subgroup indices of “∧”v s .“∨”.
(i) LetA be anabelian groupand B1,B2 ⊆ A subgroupsof A such thatB1 ∩B2
has ﬁnite index in B1 and B2. Then one may deﬁne a positive rational number,
which we call theindex of B2 relative toB1,
[B1 : B2]
def
=[ B1 : B1 ∩ B2]/[B2 : B1 ∩ B2] ∈ Q>0.

===== PAGE 49 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 49
Thus, [B1 : B2] ·[B2 : B1]=1 ;w h e nB2 ⊆ B1, this notion of index coincides with
the usual notion of the index ofB2 in B1.
(ii) Letn be a positive integer≥ 2. Consider thediagram of group homomor-
phisms
G1
n·
−→ G2
n·
−→ G3
—w h e r e ,f o ri =1 ,2,3, Gi denotes a copy of [the additive group of rational
integers] Z,a n dt h ea r r o w sa r eg i v e nb ymultiplication by n.F o ri =1 ,2,3, write
GQ
i
def
= Gi ⊗Z Q for the tensor product ofGi over Z with Q. Then observe that this
diagram induces adiagram of group isomorphisms
GQ
1
∼
→ GQ
2
∼
→ GQ
3
— i.e., in which the arrows areisomorphisms. Let us use these isomorphisms to
identify the groupsGQ
i ,f o ri =1 ,2,3, and denote the resulting group byGQ
∗.
(iii) Observe that the ﬁrst diagram of (ii) is structurally reminiscent of the
object J discussed in Examples 2.3.2, 2.4.1, 2.4.2, i.e., if one regards
· the ﬁrst arrowof the ﬁrst diagram of (ii) as corresponding to†I,
· the second arrowof the ﬁrst diagram of (ii) as corresponding to‡I,a n d
· G1, G2,a n dG3 as corresponding to†α, †β= ‡α,a n d‡β, respectively.
Here, we observe thatG2 appears simultaneously as thecodomain of the arrow
G1
n·
−→ G2 AND [cf. (AOL1)!] as thedomain of the arrowG2
n·
−→ G3.M o r e o v e r ,
we may considerindices of G1, G2,a n dG3 as subgroupsof GQ
∗
[G2 : G1]=[ G1 : G2]−1 = n;[ G3 : G2]=[ G2 : G3]−1 = n;
[G3 : G1]=[ G1 : G3]−1 = n2
in a consistent fashion, i.e., in a fashion that doesnot give rise to anycontra-
dictions.
(iv) On the other hand, suppose that wedelete the “distinct labels”G1, G2, G3
from the copies ofZ considered in theﬁrst diagramof (ii). This yields adiagram
Z
n·
−→ Z
n·
−→ Z
in which the second arrow m a yb er e g a r d e da sacopy of the ﬁrst arrow.T h i s
situation might motivate some observers to conclude that these two arrows are
“redundant”and hence should beidentiﬁed with one another — cf. the discus-
sion of the quotientJ ↠ M in Example 2.3.2, (ii) — to form adiagram
n·
↷Z
consisting of asingle copyof Z and theendomorphism of this single copy ofZ given
bymultiplicationbyn. At ﬁrst glance, this operation ofidentiﬁcation may appear
to give rise to various“contradictions”in the computation of theindex, i.e., such
as
1=[ G1 : G1]=[ Z : Z]=[ G2 : G1]= n ≥ 2

===== PAGE 50 =====

50 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
and so on. In fact, however, if one takes into account theOR relator“∨” [but not
the AND relator“∧”!] relations that one obtains upon executing the identiﬁcation
operation in question [cf. (AOL2), (AOL4)!], then one concludes that [after exe-
cuting the identiﬁcation operation in question!] each of the indices [Gi : Gj], for
i,j ∈{ 1,2,3}, may only be computed up to multiplication by an integral power of
n, i.e., that
each index [Gi : Gj], for i,j ∈{ 1,2,3}, is only well-deﬁned as “some
indeterminate element”of nZ def
= {nm | m ∈ Z}⊆ Q>0.
In particular, in fact there isno contradiction.
Example 2.4.4: Logical “∧/∨” vs. “narrative∧/∨”. Consider the following
argument concerning anatural numberx ∈{ 1,3}, i.e., a natural number for which
it holds that (x =1 ) ∨ (x =3 ) :
(Nar1) Suppose that x = 3. Then it follows thatx =3 > 2. That is to say, we
conclude that x> 2.
(Nar2) Since (x =1 ) ∨ (x = 3), we may consider the casex = 1. Then, by
applying the conclusion of (Nar1), we conclude that 1 =x> 2, i.e., that
1 > 2—a contradiction!
Of course, this argument is completely fallacious! On the other hand, it yields
a readily understood concrete example of theabsurdity that arises when, as is in
eﬀect done in (Nar2),logical OR “∨”is confusedwith logical AND “∧”!I nv a r i o u s
contexts, this sort of confusion can arise from theambiguity of various narrative
expressions that appear in the discussion of a mathematical argument. This sort
of ambiguity can lead to a situation in which
a “narrative AND ∧”— i.e., the fact that in a particular narrative
exposition of an argument, one performsboth the task of considering the
case “x = 3” [cf. (Nar1)]and the task of considering the case “x =1 ”[ c f .
(Nar2)] — is mistakenly construed as alogical AND “∧”.
In a similar vein, one may consider situations in which the roles played by “∧”
and “∨”a r ereversed, i.e., in which a“narrative OR ∨”— i.e., the fact that in
a particular narrative exposition of an argument, one’s attention is concentrated
eitheron the task of considering one situationoron the task of considering another
situation — is mistakenly construed as alogical OR “ ∨”. Indeed, it appears
that one fundamental cause, in the context of the essential logical structure of
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory [cf. the discussion of Example 2.4.5 below!], of
the confusion on the part of some mathematicians between logical AND “∧”a n d
logical OR “∨” lies precisely in this sort of confusion between“narrative ∧/∨”
and logical “∧/∨”.
Example 2.4.5: Numerical representation of “∧”v s .“∨”.
(i) A slightly more sophisticated numerical representation of the diﬀerence
between “∧”a n d“∨” — which in factmirrors the essential logical structure
of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory in a very direct fashion— may be given as

===== PAGE 51 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 51
follows [cf. [Alien], Example 3.11.4]. Indeed, the essential logical ﬂow of inter-
universal Teichm¨uller theory may be summarized as follows:
· one starts with the deﬁnition of an object called the Θ-link;
· one then constructs a complicated apparatus that is referred to as the
multiradial representation of the Θ-pilot [cf. [IUTchIII], Theorem
3.11];
· ﬁnally, one derives aﬁnal numerical estimate[cf. [IUTchIII], Corol-
lary 3.12] in an essentially straightforward fashion from the multiradial
representation of the Θ-pilot.
(ii) An elementary model of this essential logical ﬂow may be given by means
of real numbersA,B ∈ R>0 and ϵ,N ∈ R such that 0≤ ϵ ≤ 1 in the following way:
· Θ-link: (
N
def
= −2B
)
∧
(
N
def
= −A
)
;
· multiradial representation of theΘ-pilot:
(
N = −2A+ϵ
)
∧
(
N = −A
)
;
· ﬁnal numerical estimate:
−2A+ϵ = −A, henceA = ϵ, i.e.,A ≤ 1.
Thus, the deﬁnition of the Θ-link and the construction of themultiradial represen-
tation of theΘ-pilot are meaningful/nontrivial precisely on account of the validity
of theAND relator“∧”, which is rendered possible, in the deﬁnition of the Θ-link,
precisely by allowing the real numbersA, B to be [a priori] distinct real numbers
— cf. (AOL1) vs. (AOL4), where we think in terms of thecorrespondences
B ←→ †I,N ←→ γJ,A ←→ ‡I
−2B ←→ †β, −A ←→ ‡α, −2A ←→ ‡β.
The passage from themultiradial representation of theΘ-pilotto theﬁnal numerical
estimate is thenimmediate/straightforward/logically transparent.
(iii) By contrast, if, in the elementary numerical model of (ii), onereplaces
“∧”b y“∨”, then our elementary numerical model of the logical structure of inter-
universal Teichm¨uller theory takes the following form:
· “ ∨” version ofΘ-link:
(
N
def
= −2B
)
∨
(
N
def
= −A
)
[cf.
(
N
def
= −2A
)
∨
(
N
def
= −A
)
];
· “ ∨” version of multiradial representation of theΘ-pilot:
(
N = −2A+ϵ
)
∨
(
N = −A
)
;

===== PAGE 52 =====

52 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
· ﬁnal numerical estimate:
−2A+ϵ = −A, henceA = ϵ, i.e.,A ≤ 1.
That is to say, the use ofdistinct real numbersA, B in the deﬁnition of the “∨”v e r -
sion of Θ-link seemsentirely superﬂuous [cf. (AOL2), relative to the correspon-
dences discussed in (ii)]. This motivates one toidentifyA and B — i.e., to suppose
“for the sake of simplicity”that A = B — which then has the eﬀect of rendering
the deﬁnition of the original “∧” version of the Θ-linkinvalid/self-contradictory[cf.
(AOL4), relative to the correspondences discussed in (ii)]. Once oneidentiﬁes A
and B, i.e., once one supposes “for the sake of simplicity” thatA = B, the pas-
sage from the “∨” version of Θ-link to the resulting “∨” version of themultiradial
representation of theΘ-pilot then seems entirely meaningless/devoid of any
interesting content. The passage from the resulting meaningless “∨” version of
the multiradial representation of theΘ-pilot to the ﬁnal numerical estimate then
seems abrupt/mysterious/entirely unjustiﬁed, i.e., put another way, looks as
if
one erroneously replaced the “∨” in the meaningless “∨” version of
the multiradial representation of the Θ-pilot by an “∧”without any
mathematical justiﬁcation whatsoever.
It is precisely thispernicious chain of misunderstandingsemanating from the
“redundancy”assertions of the RCS that has given rise to a substantial amount
of unnecessary confusion concerning inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory.
(iv) Before proceeding, we observe that the sort ofconfusion discussed in (iii)
between “∧”a n d“∨” can occur as the result of any of the following phenomena:
(AOC1) a confusion between“narrative ∧/∨”and logical “∧/∨”, as discussed
in Example 2.4.4;
(AOC2) thinking in terms of the“fake ∧”of (AOL3), i.e., which, though for-
mulated as a logical AND “∧” relation, is in fact, substantively speaking,
a logical OR “∨”relation;
(AOC3) the symptom (Syp2) discussed in §3.6 below, i.e., a desire to see the
“proof”ofsomesortof commutative diagramor“compatibility prop-
erty”to the eﬀect that takinglog-volumes of pilot objectsin the domain
and codomain of the Θ-link yields thesame real number;
(AOC4) a fundamental misunderstanding — which is often closely inter-
twined with the symptom (Syp2) discussed in (AOC3) — of the meaning
of the crucial closed loop of §3.10, (Stp7), (Stp8), below [cf. §3.10,
(Stp7), (Stp8), as well as the following discussion].
(v) Let us refer to the “∧” version of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory dis-
cussed in (ii) — i.e., theoriginal version of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, in
which one interprets the Θ-link as alogical AND “∧”relation — asAND-IUT.
Thus,

===== PAGE 53 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 53
AND-IUT = IUTis theoriginal versionof inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory.
Let us refer to the “∨” version of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory discussed in
(iii) — i.e., the version of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory that arises if one [mis-
takenly!] interprets the Θ-link as alogical OR “∨”relation — asOR-IUT.A s
discussed in (iii), in OR-IUT, one is motivated to implement the RCS-identiﬁcations
ofRCS-redundantcopiesofobjects—i.e., inthelanguageof(iii), to “identify A and
B”— and hence to conclude thatOR-IUT =⇒ RCS-IUT, where we recall that
“RCS-IUT” refers to the version of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory obtained by
implementing the RCS-identiﬁcations of RCS-redundant copies of objects [cf. the
discussion of§1.2]. On the other hand, it is not diﬃcult to see that in RCS-IUT, one
is forced to work with a(NeuORInd) indeterminacy[cf. the discussion at the end of
§3.4 below, as well as the discussion of (ΘORInd) in§3.11 below], i.e., to interpret
the Θ-link as a logical XOR “˙∨”relation [that is to say, alogical OR “∨”
relation such that the correspondinglogical AND “∧”relation cannot hold—c f .
the discussion of (iii)]. In particular, we conclude thatRCS-IUT =⇒ XOR-IUT
=⇒ OR-IUT [where the second “ =⇒ ” is a consequence of well-known general
properties of Boolean operators], i.e., in summary:
(XOR/RCS) we haveequivalencesXOR-IUT ⇐⇒ OR-IUT ⇐⇒ RCS-IUT.
Inthefollowing, Ishallrefertothe school of thought[i.e., inthesenseofa“collection
of closely interrelated ideas”] surrounding OR-IUT asORS, i.e., the “OR school
[of thought]”, and to theschool of thoughtsurrounding XOR-IUT asXORS, i.e.,
the “XOR school [of thought]”. Thus,XORS = ORS = RCS.
(vi) On the other hand, one may also consider yet another version of inter-
universal Teichm¨uller theory, also motivated by the discussion of (iii), which we
refer to asEssOR-IUT, i.e., “essentially OR IUT”. This is the version of inter-
universal Teichm¨uller theory in which one accepts, at the level of formal deﬁnitions,
the logical AND “ ∧”v e r s i o no ft h eΘ-link as in (ii), i.e., without identifying
A and B, but [for some unexplained reason!] one then arbitrarily shifts,w h e n
considering themultiradial representation of theΘ-pilot,t ot h elogical OR
“ ∨”interpretation of the multiradial representation of the Θ-pilot, i.e., as in (iii).
That is to say, as the name “EssOR-IUT” suggests, the fundamentallogical AND
“∧”property of the Θ-link is never actually used in any sort of meaningful wayin
EssOR-IUT. In particular,
(EssOR/RCS) although, at a purelyformal level, EssOR-IUT rejectsRCS-IUT,t h e
essential logical structureof EssOR-IUT still nevertheless gives rise to the
abrupt/mysterious/entirely unjustiﬁed transition discussed in (iii)
to theﬁnal numerical estimate.
It appears that the “arbitrarily shift”referred to above is often precipitated by
the various phenomena discussed in (iv) [cf., especially, (AOC3), (AOC4)]. In the
following, I shall refer to theschool of thought[i.e., in the sense of a “collection of
closely interrelated ideas”] surrounding EssOR-IUT asEssORS, i.e., the “essen-
tially OR school [of thought]”.
(vii) In general, at the level of formalities ofBoolean operators,“ ∧⇒∨ ”, but
“∨ ̸⇒∧ ”. In particular, in the context of the transition to theﬁnal numerical
estimate of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory,

===== PAGE 54 =====

54 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(∨ ̸⇒∧ ) it appears entirely hopeless/unrealisticto pass from the “∨” version of
the multiradial representation of the Θ-pilot to the “∧” version of the
multiradial representation of the Θ-pilot.
This is precisely the“abrupt/mysterious/entirely unjustiﬁed”transition [to theﬁnal
numerical estimate] discussed in (iii).
(viii) The discussion of (v), (vi), (vii) may be summarized as follows [cf. also
the discussion of§1.2, §1.3]:
· The fundamental misunderstandingon the part of adherents of the
RCS = ORS = XORS to the eﬀect that OR-IUT or XOR-IUT is indeed
the content of AND-IUT = IUT leads to themistaken interpretation of
the assertion (XOR/RCS) as anequivalence between AND-IUT = IUT
and RCS-IUT.
· The fundamental misunderstandingon the part of adherents of the
RCS = ORS = XORS to the eﬀect that OR-IUT or XOR-IUT is indeed
the content of AND-IUT = IUT leads to themistaken interpretation of
the assertion (∨ ̸⇒∧ )a sa logical ﬂawin AND-IUT = IUT.
· The fundamental misunderstandingon the part of adherents of the
EssORStotheeﬀectthatEssOR-IUTisindeedthecontentofAND-IUT=
IUT leadseither to themistaken interpretationof the assertion (∨ ̸⇒∧ )a s
a logical ﬂawin AND-IUT = IUTor to themistaken interpretationof the
assertion (∨ ̸⇒∧ ) as an indication the existence of some sort ofinﬁnitely
complicated and mysterious argument— i.e., for concluding that “∨⇒∧ ”!
— in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory that requires years of concerted
eﬀort to understand. Thus, as the descriptive“essential”suggests, there
is in fact, from the point of view of theessential logical structureunder
consideration, very little diﬀerencebetween EssORS and XORS = ORS =
RCS or between EssOR-IUT and XOR-IUT⇐⇒ OR-IUT ⇐⇒ RCS-IUT.
· In fact, thecorrect interpretation of the assertion (∨ ̸⇒∧ ) consists
of the conclusion thatneither XOR-IUT⇐⇒ OR-IUT ⇐⇒ RCS-IUT nor
EssOR-IUT has any direct logical relationship to AND-IUT = IUT.
Here, weobservethattheaboveanalysisisinsomesense remarkableinthatitmakes
explicit the fact that, if oneforgets the arbitrary label “inter-universal Te-
ichm¨uller theory”placed on XOR-IUT or OR-IUT or EssOR-IUT by adherents
of the RCS = ORS = XORS or the EssORS, then [perhaps somewhat surprisingly!]
(MthVl) there is in fact no disagreement among any of the parties involved
withregardtothe mathematical validityofthemathematicalassertions
(XOR/RCS) and (∨ ̸⇒∧ ).
Indeed, this state of aﬀairs may be understood as in some sense highlighting thees-
sentially social/political/psychological, i.e., in summary, non-mathematicalnature
of theentirely unnecessary confusionthat has arisen concerning inter-universal Te-
ichm¨uller theory [cf. the discussion of §1.8, §1.11]. The above observations are

===== PAGE 55 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 55
summarized in the“dictionary of assertions”given below.
Assertions of Actual
various schools of thought mathematical content
R C S=O R S=X O R S :
“IUT ⇔ RCS-IUT” “XOR-IUT ⇔ OR-IUT ⇔ RCS-IUT”
“∨ ̸⇒∧ ”,
R C S=O R S=X O R S : which implies that
“IUT is logically ﬂawed.” “(AND-IUT =) IUT̸⇒ RCS-IUT”,
“(AND-IUT =) IUT̸⇒ OR-IUT”,
“(AND-IUT =) IUT̸⇒ XOR-IUT”
EssORS:
either “IUT is logically ﬂawed.” “∨ ̸⇒∧ ”,
or “The logical structure of which implies that
IUT is inﬁnitely “(AND-IUT =) IUT̸⇒ EssOR-IUT”
complicated/mysterious.”
Example 2.4.6: Carry operations in arithmetic, geometry, and Boolean
logic.
(i) Observe that if, in the situation of Example 2.4.3, (ii), one focuses one’s
attention on the subsetD4−i ⊆ Gi in the copy ofZ denoted byGi,w h e r ei =1 ,2,3,
corresponding to {0,1,2,...,n − 1}⊆ Z, then the situation considered in Example
2.4.3, (ii), closely resembles the situation that arises inelementary arithmetic com-
putations —s u c ha saddition and multiplication — involvingbase n expansions
of natural numbers. That is to say, one may think of
· D1 as theﬁrst digit, i.e., whenn = 10, the“ones digit”,
· D2 as thesecond digit, i.e., whenn = 10, the“tens digit”,a n d
· D3 as thethird digit, i.e., whenn = 10, the“hundreds digit”
of such an expansion. When performing such elementary arithmetic computations
— such as addition and multiplication — involving basen expansions of natural
numbers, recall that it is offundamental importanceto take into account the various
carry operations that occur. In particular, we observe that
the use ofdistinct labelsfor distinct digitsplays afundamental rolein
elementaryarithmeticcomputationsinvolving basen expansions of natural
numbers

===== PAGE 56 =====

56 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
—c f .t h edistinct labels“G1”, “G2”, “G3” in the discussion of Example 2.4.3, (ii),
(iii). This situation is reminiscent of the important role played by thedistinct
labels “A”, “B”i nt h e“Θ-link”of Example 2.4.5, (ii). Note, morever, that
deletion/confusion of thesedistinct labelsfor distinct digitshas the
eﬀect ofcompletely invalidating, at least in the usual “strict sense”,
elementaryarithmeticcomputationsinvolving basen expansions of natural
numbers
— cf. the situation considered in Example 2.4.3, (iv). On the other hand, if one
restricts one’s attention to aspeciﬁc computational algorithm [involving, say,
addition and multiplication operations], then in fact it is often possible — i.e., de-
pending on the content of the speciﬁc computational algorithm under consideration
—t oo b t a i n
estimates to the eﬀect that applying the algorithm eitherwith or without
the use of distinct labels for distinct digits in the base n expansions of
the natural numbers involved in fact yields thesame result, up to some
explicitly bounded discrepancy.
[For instance, whenn = 10, any algorithm that only involvesaddition and multipli-
cation operations yields thesame result modulo9( =1 0− 1), regardless of whether
or not one usesdistinct labels for distinct digits in decimal expansions of natural
numbers.] Such estimates are reminiscent of the“multiradial representation”
of Example 2.4.5, (ii).
(ii) Observe that the discussion of
· adjacent oriented line segments“†I”, “‡I”a n d
· oriented loops“L”, “M”
in Examples 2.3.1, 2.3.2, 2.4.1, 2.4.2 [cf. also the discussion of Examples 2.4.3, (iii);
2.4.5, (ii)] may be regarded as a sort oflimiting caseof the discussion ofbase n
expansions of natural numbersin (i) above, i.e., if one
· considers the real numbers obtained by dividing the natural numbers
≤ 2n in the discussion of (i) aboveby n and then
· passes to thelimit n → +∞ .
That is to say, in summary,
the adjacency of the oriented line segments “†I”, “‡I” may be under-
stood as a sort ofcontinuous, geometric representationof thecarry
operation that appears in elementary arithmetic computations involving
base n expansions of natural numbers.
(iii) From the point of view of discussions of thelogical structure of math-
ematical arguments represented in terms ofBoolean operators such as logical
AND “∧”and logical OR “∨”, it is of interest to consider the discussion of (i)
above in the binary case, i.e., the case n = 2. We begin our discussion of the
binary case by recalling the following well-known facts:
· multiplicationinthe ﬁeld F2 = {0,1}mayberegardedascorresponding
to theBoolean operator AND “∧”;

===== PAGE 57 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 57
· addition in theﬁeld F2 = {0,1} may be regarded as corresponding to
the Boolean operator XOR[i.e., “exclusive OR”], which we denote by
“˙∨”;
· “carry-addition”in the truncated ring of Witt vectors F2 × F2 —
i.e., addition of two elements ofF2
∼
→{ 0}× F2 ⊆ F2 × F2, regarded as
Teichm¨uller representatives in the truncated ring of Witt vectorsZ/4Z,
that is to say, an addition operation in which one allows for thecarry
operation [cf. the discussion of (i)!] to theﬁrst factorof F2 ×F2 —m a y
be regarded as corresponding to an operator that we shall refer to as the
“COR”, or “carry-OR”, operatorand denote by “¨∨”; thus, we have
¨∨ =( ∧, ˙∨)
[so 0 ¨∨ 0=( 0 ,0); 1 ¨∨ 0=0 ¨∨ 1=( 0 ,1); 1 ¨∨ 1=( 1 ,0)].
These well-known facts case may be summarized as follows:
(¨∨= ∧ ˙∨) Conventional mixed-characteristic/“carry” additionin Z consid-
ered modulo 4 — i.e., “¨∨” — may be described in terms of the“splitting”
of the natural surjectionZ ↠ F2 determined by the“Teichm¨uller repre-
sentatives”0,1 ∈ Z via the equation
¨∨ =( ∧, ˙∨)
— i.e., which exhibits “¨∨” as an operation obtained by“stacking”mul-
tiplication “∧”i nF2 on top of addition “˙∨”i nF2. Here, we note
that this splitting via Teichm¨uller representatives 0,1 ∈ Z is compatible
with themultiplicative structures inZ and F2, butnot with theaddi-
tive structures inZ and F2. Put another way, one may think of the ring
structures of Z and F2 as structures that share acommon multiplicative
structure [cf. “ ∧”!], but donot share a common additive structure [cf.
“˙∨”!].
These observations will be offundamental importancein the theory developed in
§3 [cf., especially, the discussion at the beginning of§3.10].
(iv) Some readers may object to the comparisons and analogies between inter-
universal Teichm¨uller theory and the“mathematics of carry operations”dis-
cussed in (i), (ii), and (iii) as being inappropriate on the grounds that this mathe-
matics of carry operations is much too“trivial”to be of any substantive interest.
On the other hand, we observe that the mathematics of carry operations discussed
in (i), (ii), and (iii) isintimately intertwined with numerous important develop-
ments in thehistory of mathematics. With regard to the content of (i), we recall
that the use ofplace-value decimal numerals, i.e., that make use of notation
for zero, appears to date back toIndian texts and inscriptions from the 7-th to
9-th centuries AD. Such numerals also reached theArab world during this period,
but thisHindu-Arabic numeral systemapparently only became widely used in
Europe during the late middle ages, between the 13-th and 15-th centuries. In
this context, one noteworthy development was the bookLiber Abacipublished by
the Italian mathematicianFibonacciin 1202, which promoted the use of the Hindu-
Arabic numeral system in Europe. Here, it is useful to recall that, by comparison to

===== PAGE 58 =====

58 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
earlier numeral systems, such as theGreco-Romanand Babylonian systems, place-
value decimal numeralsnot only facilitate elementary arithmetic computations —
i.e., via the systematic use ofcarry operations, as discussed in (i)! — but also
make it possible to expressall — hence, in particular,inﬁnitely many —
natural numbersby means ofﬁnitely many symbols
— i.e., unlike earlier numerical systems, in which onlyﬁnitely many natural num-
berscould be expressed using ﬁnitely many symbols. Thisrevolutionary importance
of the development of place-value decimal numerals in India was recognized, for in-
stance, in writings of the 18-th century French mathematicianLaplace.I n t h i s
context, it is also of interest to observe that the discussion in (ii) of the interpreta-
tion of the discussion of (i) in terms ofline segmentsis reminiscent of the discussion
of the“Euclidean algorithm”in Euclid’s Elements,i nw h i c hn u m b e r sa r eo f t e nr e p -
resented as lengths of line segments. Finally, we recall that the Boolean aspects
discussed in (iii) played an important role in the [well-known!] development of
modern digital computersin the 20-th century.
The gluings of adjacent line segmentsdiscussed in Examples 2.3.2, 2.4.1, 2.4.2
may in some sense be regarded as a sort of
optimized elementary geometric/combinatorial representationof
the essential logical “∧/∨” structuresurrounding agluing
in a fashion that isqualitatively entirely structually similarto the gluings that occur
in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, which will be discussed in more detail in§3
below. The somewhat morenumerical/arithmeticsituations discussed in Examples
2.4.3, 2.4.5, 2.4.6 may also be regarded asentirely elementaryrepresentations of this
essential logical “∧/∨” structuresurrounding agluing. On the other hand, theglu-
ingoperation that occurs in the standard construction of theprojective line, while
somewhat less elementary than the previously mentioned examples, also constitutes
an important— and, moreover, stillrelatively elementary! — representation of this
essential logical “∧/∨” structuresurrounding agluing. Moreover, this example of
the projective line discussed in Example 2.4.7 ismore directly related toscheme-
theoretic arithmetic geometry than the previously mentioned examples and
helps to motivate the subsequentring-/monoid-theoretic Example 2.4.8, which
may literally be regarded, i.e., in a much morerigorous, technical sense,a sas o r t
of miniature qualitative model — that is to say, so to speak, a sort of“preview”—
of thegluing constituted by the Θ-link of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory.
Example 2.4.7: The projective line as a gluing of ring schemes along a
multiplicative group scheme. Inthefollowingdiscussion, wetake k tobea ﬁeld
andq ∈ k tobeanelementsuchthat q3 ̸= q [i.e., q ̸∈{ 0,1, −1}]. Writek× def
= k\{0},
A1 for theaﬃne lineSpec(k[T]) overk, Gm for the open subscheme Spec(k[T,T −1])
of A1 obtained by removing the origin. Thus, the standard coordinateT on A1,
Gm determines natural bijectionsA1(k)
∼
→ k, Gm(k)
∼
→ k× of the respective sets of
k-rational points ofA1, Gm with corresponding subsets ofk. Also, we recall that
A1 is equipped with a well-known natural structure ofring schemeover k, while
Gm is equipped with a well-known natural structure of[multiplicative] group
scheme over k.

===== PAGE 59 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 59
(i) Write†A1, ‡A1 for thek-ring schemesgiven bycopies of A1 equipped with
the respectivelabels “†”, “‡”. We regard†A1 as being further equipped with the
k-rational point †q−1 ∈ †A1(k)(
∼
→ k) corresponding to the multiplicative inverse
of the elementq ∈ k and ‡A1 as being further equipped with thek-rational point
‡q ∈ ‡A1(k)(
∼
→ k) corresponding to the elementq ∈ k. Similarly, we write†Gm,
‡Gm for the[multiplicative] k-group schemesgiven bycopies of Gm, equipped with
the respectivelabels “†”, “‡”. Thus,†q−1 ∈ †Gm(k)( ⊆ †A1(k)), ‡q ∈ ‡Gm(k)( ⊆
‡A1(k)).
(ii) Relative to the notation of (i), we observe that
(ii-a) there exists a unique isomorphism of k-ring schemes †A1 ∼
→ ‡A1,
but that
(ii-b) the pairs (†A1,†q−1)a n d(‡A1,‡q)a r enot isomorphic, i.e., as pairs
consisting of ak-ring schemeequipped with ak-rational point[cf. our
assumption thatq3 ̸= q].
By contrast,
(ii-c) there exists aunique isomorphismof pairs (†Gm,†q−1)
∼
→ (‡Gm,‡q),
i.e., of pairs consisting of a[multiplicative] k-group schemeequipped
with a k-rational point.
Here, we observe that the isomorphism (†Gm,†q−1)
∼
→ (‡Gm,‡q) of (ii-c) doesnot
extend [cf. (ii-b)!] to an isomorphism (†A1,†q−1)
∼
→ (‡A1,‡q). In particular,
(ii-d) the isomorphism of[multiplicative] k-group schemes†Gm
∼
→ ‡Gm is
not compatible with the k-ring scheme structuresof †A1 (⊇ †Gm),
‡A1 (⊇ ‡Gm).
Next, we observe that
(ii-e) the standard construction of theprojective line may be regarded as
the result ofgluing (†A1,†q−1)t o(‡A1,‡q) along the isomorphism
(†Gm,†q−1)
∼
→ (‡Gm,‡q)
of (ii-c); thus, relative to this gluing, †Gm
∼
→ ‡Gm may be regarded si-
multaneously as an open subscheme of†A1 AND [cf. “∧”!] as an open
subscheme of‡A1.
In particular, (ii-d), (ii-e) may be summarized as follows:
the standard construction of theprojective line may be regarded as a
gluing of tworing schemesalong anisomorphism of multiplicative
group schemes that is not compatible with the ring scheme struc-
tures on either side of the gluing.
Moreover, we note that,relative to this gluing,
(ii-f) the notion of a regular function on †A1 cannot be expressed di-
rectly in terms of the notion of aregular functionon ‡A1,w h e r e a s
(ii-g) the notion of arational functionon †A1 can be expressed directly
in terms of — i.e., in essence,coincides, relative to the above gluing, with
— the notion of arational functionon ‡A1.

===== PAGE 60 =====

60 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Finally, we observe that
(ii-h) if, in the gluing of (ii-e), onearbitrarily deletes the distinct labels
“†”, “‡”, then the resulting“gluing without labels”a m o u n t st oag l u i n go f
asingle copyofA1 to itself that maps the standard coordinate “T”o nA1
[regarded, say, as a rational function onA1]t oT−1; that is to say, such a
“gluing without labels” results in acontradiction [i.e., sinceT ̸= T−1!],
unless one passes to some sort ofquotient of A1 — which amounts, from
a foundational/logical point of view, to the introduction of some sort of
indeterminacy, i.e., to the consideration of some sort ofcollection of
possibilities [cf. “∨”!].
(iii) The discussion of the projective line in (ii) istruly remarkablein that it
completely parallels— i.e., relative to thecorrespondence
“−1” ←→ “j2”
between theexponent “−1”in the discussion of (ii) and theexponents “j2”, where
j ranges from 1 tol⋇, in the discussion of§3.4 — numerous aspects of the Θ-link
of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, which we shall discuss in more detail in§3
[cf., especially, §3.4]. Indeed,
(iii-a) the isomorphism of (ii-a) may be understood as corresponding to the
fact that the(Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theaterson either side of the Θ-link in
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory areisomorphic, while
(iii-b) the observation of (ii-b) may be understood as corresponding to the fact
that there isno isomorphismof (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theatersas in (iii-
a) that maps the Θ-pilot in thedomain of the Θ-link [which corresponds
to “†q−1”] to theq-pilot in thecodomainof the Θ-link [which corresponds
to “‡q”].
On the other hand,
(iii-c) the isomorphism of (ii-c) may be understood as corresponding to thefull
poly-isomorphism of [multiplicative!] F⊩▶×μ-prime-strips that
constitutes the Θ-link, while
(iii-d) the observation of (ii-d) may be understood as corresponding to the fact
that the full poly-isomorphism of (iii-c) isnot compatiblewith thering
structures determined by the (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theaters on either side
of the Θ-link, i.e., in particular, doesnot arise from a poly-isomorphism
between these (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theaters on either side of the Θ-link [cf.
(iii-b)].
Next, we observe that
(iii-e) the gluing of (ii-e) may be understood as corresponding to the glu-
ing constituted by the Θ-link between the (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theaters on
either side of the Θ-link, i.e., a gluing along[multiplicative!] F⊩▶×μ-
prime-strips that isnot compatible with thering structures in the
domain and codomain of the Θ-link, but which allows one to obtain a
single F⊩▶×μ-prime-strip, up to isomorphism, that may be interpreted

===== PAGE 61 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 61
simultaneously as the F⊩▶×μ-prime-strip arising from the Θ-pilot in
the domain of the Θ-linkAND [cf. “ ∧”!] as the F⊩▶×μ-prime-strip
arising from theq-pilot in thecodomainof the Θ-link.
Here, we recall that this cruciallogical AND “∧” propertyof the Θ-link is the
central themeof the present paper [cf. the discussion of Examples 2.4.1, 2.4.2, 2.4.3,
2.4.4, 2.4.5, 2.4.6!]. Next, we observe that
(iii-f) the observation of (ii-f) may be understood as corresponding to the fact
that, at least from ana prioripoint of view, there isno natural wayto
express the Θ-pilot of the (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theater in thedomain of the
Θ-link, relative to the gluing of (iii-e), in terms of the (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge
theater in thecodomainof the Θ-link, while
(iii-g) the observation of (ii-g) may be understood as corresponding to thesi-
multaneous holomorphic expressibility (SHE)property of themul-
tiradial representation of the Θ-pilot [cf. [IUTchIII], Remark 3.11.1,
(iii); [IUTchIII], Remark 3.9.5, (viii), (ix)], which allows one toexpress
the Θ-pilot of the (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theater in thedomain of the Θ-link,
relative to the gluing of (iii-e), in terms of the (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theater
in thecodomain of the Θ-link [cf. also the discussion of (iv), (v), below;
the discussion surrounding Example 2.4.8, (iii-a), (iii-b), below].
Finally, we note that
(iii-h) the “gluing without labels”discussed in (ii-h) may be understood as cor-
responding to the oversimpliﬁed version“RCS-IUT”of inter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory obtained by implementing the RCS-identiﬁcations of
RCS-redundant copies of objects [cf. the discussion of §1.2, Example
2.4.5], which leads to an immediatecontradiction, unless one introduces
some sort ofquotient/indeterminacy, i.e., which amounts to the con-
sideration of some sort ofcollection of possibilities[cf. “∨”!].
Inparticular, relativetothis remarkably close structural resemblancebetween
the gluing that appears in the standard construction of theprojective line and
the gluing constituted by the Θ-link of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, the
central assertion
“IUT ⇔ RCS-IUT”
of the RCS [cf. the discussion of Example 2.4.5] may be understood as correspond-
ing to the assertion of an “obvious equivalence”[cf. the discussion of §1.3]
between
· the projective line, on the one hand, and
· the aﬃne lineregarded up to some sort of identiﬁcation of the standard
coordinate “T” on the aﬃne line with its inverse, on the other.
(iv) From the point of view of the analogy discussed in (iii) between thegluing
construction of theprojective lineand inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, perhaps
the closest nontrivial analogue, in the case of the projective line, to themultiradial
representation of the Θ-pilot in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory is the group
of projective general linear [i.e., “PGL2”]symmetries of the projective line
[cf. also the discussion of (v) below; the discussion of Example 3.10.1, (i), below].

===== PAGE 62 =====

62 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
That is to say, although there is also an analogy, discussed in (iii-g), with the
observation of (ii-g), the content of (ii-g) is ratherformal/trivial. By contrast, the
PGL2-symmetries of the projective line aresomewhat less trivial, especially from
the point of view of thegluing constructionof the projective line discussed in (ii)
[cf. also the discussion of (v) below; the discussion of Example 3.10.1, (i), below].
(v) ThePGL2-symmetries of the projective line are, in some sense, especially
interesting in the case where one takesk to be the ﬁeldC of complex numbers,a n d
one restricts to thesubgroup
PU2 ⊆ PGL2(C)
given by the image of the unitary matrices, i.e., theprojective unitary group.T h u s ,
as is well-known, one may think ofPU2 as the group ofisometric symmetriesof the
Riemann surface associated to the projective line overC equipped with theFubini-
Study metric. The underlying topological space of this Riemann surface may be
naturally identiﬁed with thesphereS2.T h egeodesicsassociated to theFubini-Study
metric then correspond togreat circleson the sphereS2 [cf., e.g., the illustration
of [GeoSph]]. In particular, the geodesics that pass through thenorth/south poles
of S2 may be thought of aslines of longitude. In the currentmetrized situation, it
is natural to think ofS2 as being obtainednot via a gluing of the complement of
the north pole to the complement of the south pole [i.e., as in (ii-e)], but rather as
being obtained via a gluing
S2 ⊇ H+ ⊇ E
def
= H+ ∩ H− ⊆ H− ⊆ S2
of thenorthern hemisphereH+ ⊆ S2 of S2 to thesouthern hemisphereH− ⊆ S2 of
S2 along theequator E ⊆ S2. Here, we note that thegluing of (ii-e) — which yields
a single rational functionon the projective line that correspondssimultaneously to
the standard coordinate “†T”o n†A1 AND to the standard coordinate “‡T−1”o n
‡A1 — may be thought of, in the currentmetrized situation, as corresponding to
the following [at ﬁrst glance,self-contradictory!] phenomenon:
(OrFlw) an oriented ﬂowalong theequator — which may be thought of phys-
ically as a sort ofwind current —t h a tﬂ o w sf r o meast to west appears
simultaneouslyto be ﬂowing, from the point of view of thenorthern hemi-
sphere H+ ⊆ S2,i nt h eclockwise direction AND, from the point of view
of thesouthern hemisphereH− ⊆ S2,i nt h ecounterclockwisedirection.
Next, let us recall that — unlikeS2!—b o t hH+ and H− may be thought of as
closed discsin the plane. Thus, in summary,
(GdsFlw) the geodesic geometry of theFubini-Study metric— i.e., in essence,
the (PGL2(C) ⊇) PU2-symmetries of S2 — allow one, by considering
the geodesic ﬂow along lines of longitude,t o represent,u pt oa
relatively mild distortion,t h ee n t i r e t yo fS2, i.e.,including H− ⊆ S2,a sa
sort ofextension/deformation of the closed discH+.
Indeed, (GdsFlw) is precisely the principle that is applied to represent, usinglines
of longitude,t h eglobe [i.e., in the sense of the surface of the planet earth] via
a rectangular, planar, cartesian map [i.e., in the sense of cartography]! Note,
moreover, that

===== PAGE 63 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 63
(NoLbDlt) although the approach of (GdsFlw) gives rise to a certain relatively mild
degree ofdistortion in therepresentation of H− in terms ofH+,i td o e s
not involve any sort ofnaive identiﬁcationof the closed discsH+, H−,
i.e., any sort ofarbitrary label deletion, in the style of (ii-h).
The interpretation discussed in (GdsFlw) and (NoLbDlt) of the (PGL2(C) ⊇) PU2-
symmetries of S2 may be understood as strongly suggesting anontrivial analogy
between these symmetries ofS2 and the multiradial representation of the Θ-
pilot in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory [cf. the analogy betweenmultiradiality
and connections/parallel transport/crystalsdiscussed in [Alien], §3.1, (iv), (v), as
well as §3.5, §3.10, below].
Example 2.4.8: Gluings of rings along multiplicative monoids.
(i) LetR be anintegral domainequipped with the action of agroup G and N
a positive integer≥ 2. For simplicity, we assume thatN =1+ ··· +1 [i.e., the sum
of N copies of “1∈ R”] determines anonzero elementof R.W r i t e
· R⊿ ⊆ R for themultiplicative monoidof nonzero elements ofR;
· R⊿ ↠ R⊿μfor thequotient multiplicative monoidof R⊿ by the group of
roots of unityof R;
· (R⊿)N ⊆ R⊿,( R⊿μ)N ⊆ R⊿μfor themultiplicative submonoidsconsist-
ing of theN-th powersof elements of “(−)”.
Thus, G acts naturally and in a compatible fashion not only on thering R, but also
on the multiplicative monoids R⊿, R⊿μ,( R⊿)N,( R⊿μ)N. Also, we observe that
the N-th power mapon R⊿μdetermines anisomorphism of multiplicative monoids
equipped with actions byG
R⊿μ ∼
→ (R⊿μ)N (⊆ R⊿μ)
that doesnot arise from aring homomorphism, i.e., as may be seen from the
fact that this isomorphism of multiplicative monoids isnot compatible with the
operation ofaddition [cf. our assumption thatN determines anonzero elementof
R!] .
(ii) Let†R, ‡R be two distinct copiesof the integral domainR of (i), equipped
with respective actions bytwo distinct copies†G, ‡G of the groupG of (i). We shall
use similar notation for objects labeled with “†”o r“‡” to the notation introduced
in (i) for objects not equipped with such labels. Then
(ii-a) one may use theisomorphism of multiplicative monoidsarising from the
N-th power mapdiscussed in (i) toglue together
†G ↷ †R ⊇ (†R⊿)N ↠ (†R⊿μ)N ∼
← ‡R⊿μ ↞ ‡R⊿ ⊆ ‡R ↶ ‡G
the ring †R to thering ‡R along themultiplicative monoid(†R⊿μ)N ∼
← ‡R⊿μ
[cf. the discussion of Example 2.4.7, (ii), (iii)!].
Here, we observe that this gluing iscompatible with the respective actions of†G,
‡G relative to the isomorphism†G
∼
→ ‡G given by forgetting the labels “†”, “‡”,
but in this context, it is of theutmost importanceto remember that

===== PAGE 64 =====

64 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(ii-b) since, as observed in (i), the N-th power map isnot compatible with
the operation ofaddition (!), this isomorphism†G
∼
→ ‡G may be regarded
either as anisomorphism of abstract groups or as anisomorphism of
groups equipped with actions on certainmultiplicative monoids, but
not as an isomorphism of groups equipped with actions onrings [i.e., †R,
‡R],
e.g., as is the case where†G, ‡G are taken to be “Galois groups”[that is to
say, groups equipped with faithful actions on someﬁeld, such as the quotient ﬁeld
of †R or ‡R]. In the context of (ii-b), we observe that, of course, one may also
consider taking the point of view that†G, ‡G are groups equipped with actions on
the diagram
†R ⊇ (†R⊿)N ↠ (†R⊿μ)N ∼
← ‡R⊿μ ↞ ‡R⊿ ⊆ ‡R
[consisting of various rings, multiplicative monoids, etc.] of (ii-a), i.e.,not just on
some isolated portionof the diagram such as†R,( †R⊿μ)N, ‡R⊿μ,o r‡R.
(ii-c) The fundamental — and indeed essentially tautological!— p r o b l e m ,
however, with this approach of thinking of†G, ‡G as groups of automor-
phisms of the diagram of the above display is that this approach yields a
situation in which one canno longer consider[i.e., in the sense that it isno
longer a well-deﬁned propositionto consider!] variousisolated portionsof
the diagram [i.e., such as†R,( †R⊿)N, ‡R⊿μ,o r‡R] equipped with actions
by †G, ‡G independently of the entire diagram.
On the other hand, as we shall see in (iii) below, themain issue of interestsur-
rounding the gluing of (ii-a) involves consideration of the extent to which one can
start precisely from such anisolated portionof the diagram — namely, theglued
data
†G ↷ (†R⊿μ)N ∼
← ‡R⊿μ↶ ‡G
— and then proceed to reconstruct, possiblyup to relatively mild indeterminacies,
some remaining portionof the diagram. Finally, we observe that the importance, in
the context of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, of thinking of Galois groups [not
as groups of automorphisms of ring/ﬁelds/diagrams involving rings (!), but rather]
as abstract groups[i.e., as emphasized in the above discussion!] is reminiscent of
the discussion of the issue of the“relative subordination”of group theoryversusﬁeld
theory [i.e., “group theory≫ ﬁeld theory” versus “ﬁeld theory≫ group theory”]
in [Alien], §4.4, (i).
(iii) In general, in the situation of thegluing considered in (ii-a),
(iii-a) the problem of describing the additive structure of †R in terms of
the additive structure of‡R — in a fashion that is compatible with the
gluing and via asingle algorithm that may be applied to theglued data
to reconstruct simultaneously the additive structures ofboth †R and
‡R — seems to behopelessly intractable!
The nontriviality of this problem may already be seen, for instance, in the case
where one takesR to be Z [i.e., the ring of rational integers]. Indeed, this sort of
problem may be understood as

===== PAGE 65 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 65
(iii-b) the starting pointof inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, where one consid-
ers thegluing constituted by the Θ-link [cf. the discussion of§3.4 below]
and the issue of describing — in a fashion compatible with thecrucial
logical AND property [cf. the discussion of (iv) below] associated to
this gluing! — certain portions of thering/additive structure of the
domain [i.e., labeled by “†”] of the Θ-link in terms of thering/additive
structure of thecodomain [i.e., labeled by “‡”] of the Θ-link via asin-
gle algorithm that may be applied to theglued data to reconstruct si-
multaneously the corresponding portions of the ring/additive structure
of both the domain and the codomain of the Θ-link [cf. the discussion
of thesimultaneous holomorphic expressibility (SHE)property in
[IUTchIII], Remark 3.11.1, (iii); [Alien],§3.7, (i); [Alien],§3.11, (iv)].
Such a description is ultimately achieved in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory by
means of the multiradial representation of the Θ-pilot, which allows one to
reconstruct, up torelatively mild indeterminacies, certain portions of interest of the
ring/additive structure of thedomain of the Θ-link in terms of the ring/additive
structure of thecodomain of the Θ-link [cf. the discussion of Example 2.4.7, (v)]
— in a fashion that is compatible with thegluing and via asingle algorithm that
may be applied to theglued datato reconstructsimultaneously the corresponding
portions of the ring/additive structure ofboth the domain and thecodomainof the
Θ-link — by making use of certain structural properties of the variousmultiplicative
monoids equipped with group actionsthat appear in the construction of the Θ-link,
aswellascertainhighlynontrivial anabelian propertiesoftheunderlying abstract
groups of the various Galois groups that appear [cf. the discussion of (ii-b) above;
the discussion of §3.2, §3.8, below]. In this context, it is also interesting to note
that, when N = p is a prime number, the fact that theFrobenius morphism
given by raising to the powerp is aring homomorphismin characteristicp may be
interpreted in the following way:
(iii-c) even in the situation of the present discussion [i.e., where the ringR is
not of positive characteristic!], theisomorphism of multiplicative monoids
obtained by raising to thep-th power — i.e., the isomorphism of mul-
tiplicative monoids that appears in the gluing of (ii-a) — may in fact
be regarded as being“simultaneously compatible”with theadditive
structures in its domain and codomain if one regards one’s computations
as being subject to the“indeterminacy”given by workingmodulo p.
Finally, we observe that this interpretation is reminiscent of the important analogies
between inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, on the one hand, andFrobenius liftings
and p-adic Teichm¨uller theory, on the other, as discussed in [Alien], §2.4, §2.5;
[Alien], §3.3, (ii) [cf. also the discussion ofcrystals in [Alien], §3.1, (v), as well as
§3.5, §3.10 below].
(iv) In the context of the gluing of (ii-a), we observe that
(iv-a) the glued multiplicative monoid(†R⊿μ)N ∼
← ‡R⊿μ,r e g a r d e du pt oi s o -
morphism, issimultaneously
· the multiplicative monoid(†R⊿μ)N associated to thering †R
AND

===== PAGE 66 =====

66 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
· the multiplicative monoid‡R⊿μassociated to thering ‡R.
In a similar vein, if one thinks of theglued group†G
∼
→ ‡G,r e g a r d e du pt oi s o -
morphism, either as anabstract groupor as agroup equipped with an action on the
glued multiplicative monoid,t h e n
(iv-b) this glued group†G
∼
→ ‡G is simultaneously
· the group †G equipped with an action on the multiplicative
monoid (†R⊿μ)N associated to thering †R
AND
· the group ‡G equipped with an action on the multiplicative
monoid (†R⊿μ)N associated to thering ‡R.
The gluing given by the Θ-link involves entirely analogouslogical AND prop-
erties, which are fundamental to the essential logical structure of inter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory, as exposed in the present paper. Of course,
(iv-c) it is always possible to consider the situation in which onedeletes the
labels “†”, “‡”, but only at the expense ofsacriﬁcing these crucial log-
ical ANDproperties (iv-a), (iv-b), i.e., at the expense of agreeing to work
under the assumption that the “glued data” is the data associated to “†”
OR the data associated to “‡”, butnot necessarily both simultaneously.
Moreover, once one deletes the labels “†”, “‡” — i.e., so that the two copies of
“R”a r eidentiﬁed with one another via anisomorphism of rings!—t h ep r o b l e m
of describing the ring/additive structure of one copy in terms of the ring/additive
structure of the other copy [cf. the discussion of (iii)!] becomes“trivial”, but this
triviality is of little interest since it is achieved only at the cost of sacriﬁcing the
crucial logical AND properties in favor of the [entirely uninteresting!]logical
OR property just described — cf. the discussion surrounding (NeuORInd) in§3.4
below, as well as the discussion of
IUT = AND-IUT
versus RCS-IUT/OR-IUT/EssOR-IUT
in Examples 2.4.5, (ii), (iii), (v), (vi), (vii); 2.4.7, (ii), (iii), (v).
(v) Finally, we note that the relationship between the discussion of the present
Example 2.4.8 and thenumerical situationdiscussed in Example 2.4.5, (ii), (iii) [cf.
also the discussion of theﬁnal page and a halfof the ﬁles “[SS2018-05]”, “[SS2018-
08]” available at the website [Dsc2018]] may be seen by considering the case where
R is taken to be thering of rational integersZ [or, in fact, slightly more generally,
the ring of integers“OF” of a ﬁnite ﬁeld extensionF of theﬁeld of rational numbers
Q — a situation that may be related to the case ofZ by applying the multiplicative
norm mapNF/Q : F → Q]. Indeed, in the case whereR is taken to beZ,o n em a y
consider the“height”
log(|x|) ∈ R

===== PAGE 67 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 67
[where “log” denotes thenatural logarithmof a positive real number, and “|−| ”
denotes the absolute value of an element ofZ] associated to a nonzero element
0 ̸= x ∈ Z. Then the N-th power map of (i), (ii) corresponds, after passing to
heights,t omultiplying real numbers byN, i.e., in essence to the situation considered
in Example 2.4.5, (ii), (iii) [which corresponds to the case where the “N”o ft h e
present discussion is taken to be 2].
Section 3: The logical structure of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory
In the present§3, we give a detailed exposition of theessential logical struc-
ture of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, with a special focus on issues related to
RCS-redundancy. From a strictly rigorous point of view, this exposition assumes a
substantial level of knowledge and understanding of the technical details of inter-
universal Teichm¨uller theory [which are surveyed, for instance, in [Alien]]. On the
other hand, in a certainqualitative sense, the discussion of the present§3m a yi n
fact be understood, at a relatively elementary level, via the analogies that we dis-
cuss with the topics covered in§2. Indeed, in this context, it should be emphasized
that, despite the relatively novel nature of the set-up of inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory,
the essential mathematical contentthat lies at the heart of all of the issues
covered in the present§3 concerns entirely well-known mathematics at the
advanced undergraduate or beginning graduatelevel [i.e., the topics covered
in §2].
§3.1. One-dimensionality via identiﬁcation of RCS-redundant copies
Inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory concerns the explicit description of the re-
lationship between various possibleintertwinings —n a m e l y ,
the “Θ”-and “ q-” intertwinings
— between thetwo underlying combinatorial/arithmetic dimensionsof a
ring [cf., e.g., [Alien], §2.11; [Alien], §3.11, (v), as well as the discussion of§3.9
below]. There are many diﬀerent ways of thinking about these two underlying
combinatorial/arithmetic dimensions of a ring; one way to understand these two
dimensions is to think of them as corresponding, respectively, to theunit group
and value groupof the various local ﬁelds that appear as completions of a number
ﬁeld at one of its valuations.
In more technical language, this sort of decomposition into unit groups and
value groups may be seen in theF⊩▶×μ-prime-strips that appear in the Θ-link
of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory. Thus, if one thinks in terms of suchF⊩▶×μ-
prime-strips, theninter-universalTeichm¨ullertheorymaybesummarizedasfollows:
(2-Dim) The main content of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory consists of an
explicit description, up to certain relatively mild indeterminacies, of the
Θ-intertwining on the [two-dimensional!] F⊩▶×μ-prime-strips that
appear in the Θ-link in terms of theq-intertwining on these F⊩▶×μ-
prime-strips by means of the log-link and various types of Kummer

===== PAGE 68 =====

68 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
theory that are used to relateFrobenius-likeand ´etale-like structures
[cf. the discussion of Example 2.4.8, (iii)].
In particular, the essential mathematical content of inter-universal Teichm¨uller the-
ory concerns ana priorivariablerelationship between thetwo underlying com-
binatorial/arithmetic dimensionsof a ring.
Put another way, if one arbitrarily“crushes”these two dimensions into asingle
dimension — i.e., in more technical language, assumes that
(1-Dim) there exists aconsistent choiceof aﬁxed relationshipbetween these
two dimensions of (2-Dim), so that these two dimensions may, in eﬀect,
be regarded as asingle dimension
— then one immediately obtains asuperﬁcial contradiction[cf. the discussion of
Example3.1.1, (i-b), (ii-b), below]. Indeed, thisisoneofthe central assertionsofthe
RCS [cf. the discussion following Example 3.1.1]. This is not a “new” observation,
but rather, in some sense, thestarting pointof inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory,
i.e., theinitial motivationfor regarding the relationship between the two underlying
combinatorial/arithmetic dimensions of a ring as beingvariable, rather than ﬁxed.
Example 3.1.1: Elementary models of gluings and intertwinings. In the
following, we shall writeV for the topological groupR>0.L e tx,y ∈ V be [not
necessarily distinct!] elements ofV and Y ⊆ V a nonempty subset ofV.L e tVrl,
Vim be two distinct labeled copiesof V, which we think of as corresponding to the
positive portions of therealand imaginary axes in the complex plane.
(i) Let†V, ‡V be twonot necessarily distinct copiesof V. We shall write
†y ∈ †V, ‡x ∈ ‡V for the respective elements determined byy,x ∈ V.
(i-a) Suppose that†V, ‡V are distinct copiesof V.W r i t eW for the topolog-
ical space obtained bygluing †V, ‡V along the homeomorphic subspaces
{†y}⊆ †V, {‡x}⊆ ‡V. Then observe that this construction ofW is well-
deﬁned and freeof anyinternal contradictions. Moreover, the existence of
W does not implyany nontrivial conclusions concerningx and y.
Note thesharp contrastbetween the situation discussed in (i-a) and the following
situation:
(i-b) Supposethat †V,‡V areinfactthe same copyofV, i.e.,∗V
def
= †V = ‡V.
Consider theassertion that
the topological space∗V is obtained bygluing †V, ‡V along the
homeomorphic subspaces {†y}⊆ †V, {‡x}⊆ ‡V.
Then observe that thisassertion concerning ∗V is well-deﬁned and freeof
internal contradictionsonly i nt h ec a s ew h e r ex = y. That is to say, the
existence of a topological space∗V as described in the aboveassertion
implies the nontrivial conclusion that x = y, or, equivalently, a“con-
tradiction”to the assertion thatx ̸= y.
One may also consider the followingvariant of (i-b):
(i-c) One replaces {†y}⊆ †V in (i-b) by the nonempty subset†Y ⊆ †V [i.e.,
determined byY ⊆ V], where one thinks of this subset as a set of“possible

===== PAGE 69 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 69
y’s”. The resulting “assertion”then becomes a corresponding collection
of assertions related bylogical OR “∨’s”, and the ﬁnalnontrivial con-
clusion is thatx ∈ Y.
(ii) The elementary models presented in (i) may be interpreted as essentially
equivalent representations of various models of“holomorphic structures”[cf.
the discussion below of (InfH), as well as Examples 3.3.1, 3.3.2] — i.e., in the ter-
minology of the discussion preceding the present Example 3.1.1,“intertwinings”
— between the“real”and “imaginary” dimensionsVrl, Vim. Here, we think of
“holomorphic structures”/“intertwinings” as being deﬁned by assignments
Vrl ∋ 1rl ↦→ ? ∈ Vim
[where 1rl ∈ Vrl denotes the element determined by 1∈ V], corresponding to“coun-
terclockwise rotations by90 degrees”, or, alternatively,“multiplication by√ −1”.I n -
deed, let†Vrl, ‡Vrl betwo not necessarily distinct copiesofVrl; †Vim, ‡Vim two
not necessarily distinct copiesof Vim. We shall write†yim ∈ †Vim, ‡xim ∈ ‡Vim
for the respective elements determined byy,x ∈ V. Then the discussion of (i-a)
may be translated into a discussion concerningintertwinings by arguing as follows:
(ii-a) Suppose that †Vrl, ‡Vrl are distinct copies of Vrl; †Vim, ‡Vim are
distinct copies of Vim. Here, we think of†Vrl, †Vim as being equipped
with theintertwining given by taking “?” to be†yim ∈ †Vim; we think of
‡Vrl, ‡Vim as being equipped with theintertwining given by taking “?” to
be ‡xim ∈ ‡Vim. Then one applies (i-a), relative to the correspondences
†Vim ←→ †V, ‡Vim ←→ ‡V. Thisyieldsa gluinga sin(i- a )tha tiswell-
deﬁned and free of any internal contradictions. Moreover, the existence
of such a gluing doesnot implyany nontrivial conclusions concerningx
and y.
In a similar vein:
(ii-b) Suppose that †Vrl, ‡Vrl are in fact thesame copyof Vrl, i.e.,∗Vrl def
=
†Vrl = ‡Vrl,a n dt h a t†Vim, ‡Vim are in fact thesame copyof Vim, i.e.,
∗Vim def
= †Vim = ‡Vim. Then one applies (i-b), relative to the correspon-
dence ∗Vim ←→ ∗V. This yields anassertion concerning agluing as in
(i-b) — i.e., in the language of the present discussion, concerning acoin-
cidence of the intertwining on †Vrl, †Vim with the intertwining on ‡Vrl,
‡Vim —t h a ti swell-deﬁned and freeof internal contradictionsonly in the
case wherex = y. That is to say, the existence of such a gluingimplies
the nontrivial conclusionthat x = y, or, equivalently, a“contradiction”
to the assertion thatx ̸= y.
(ii-c) One replaces {†yim}⊆ †Vim in (ii-b) [cf. also the notation of (ii-a)] by
the nonempty subset†Yim ⊆ †Vim [i.e., the subset determined byY ⊆ V],
where one thinks of this subset as a set of“possible y’s”. The resulting
“assertion”then becomes a corresponding collection ofassertions related
by logical OR “∨’s”, and the ﬁnalnontrivial conclusionis thatx ∈ Y.
(iii) Relative to the analogy withinter-universal Teichm¨uller theory,w eh a v e

===== PAGE 70 =====

70 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
correspondenceswithobjectsthatappearintheelementarymodelsof(ii)asfollows:
Vrl ←→ the value groupportion of anF⊩▶×μ-prime-strip;
Vim ←→ the unit groupp o r t i o no fa nF⊩▶×μ-prime-strip;
†/‡← → (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theaters in thedomain/codomainof the Θ-link;
intertwinings involving “y” ←→ the Θ-intertwinings;
intertwinings involving “x” ←→ the q-intertwinings;
[cf. the discussion at the beginning of §3.4]. Here, we note that from the point
of view ofintertwinings,t h eunit group portion corresponding to “Vim”m u s tb e
understood as beinglog-shifted by −1, relative to thevalue groupportion corre-
sponding to “Vrl” [cf. the discussion below of (InfH), as well as Examples 3.3.1,
3.3.2]. That is to say, if thevalue groupportion corresponding to “Vrl”i sl o c a t e d
at the coordinate (n,m)o ft h elog-theta-lattice, then theunit groupportion corre-
sponding to “Vim” must be understood as being located at the coordinate (n,m − 1)
of the log-theta-lattice. In particular, theunit groupand value groupportions cor-
responding to a pair “(Vrl,V im)” belong todiﬀerentF⊩▶×μ-prime-strips.F r o m
the point of view of the discussion of (1-Dim), the “consistent choice of a ﬁxed
relationship” corresponds to thecoincidence of intertwiningsin (ii-b), while the
resulting “superﬁcial contradiction”corresponds to the“contradiction”discussed
in (ii-b). On the other hand, the“explicit description”/“variable relationship”of
(2-Dim), which leads naturally to anumerical estimate/inequalityconcerning log-
volumes [cf. Example 2.4.5, (ii)], corresponds to the situation involving various
possibilities discussed in (ii-c), which leads to thenontrivial conclusion“x ∈ Y”
[cf. the discussion of“closed loops”in (Stp7), (Stp8) of§3.10 below; the discus-
sion of (DltLb) in§3.11 below; the discussion of [IUTchIII], Remark 3.12.2, (ii)].
(iv) Finally, we observe in passing that theﬁxed intertwining of (ii-b) [cf.
also the discussion of (ii-b) in (iii), as well as the discussion of (FxRng), (FxEuc),
(FxFld), (RdVar) below] may be regarded as being analogous to the well-known
classical holomorphic approach to the theory of moduli of [one-dimensional]
complex tori, that is to say, in which one works with a copy of theupper half-
plane “H”w i t haﬁxed holomorphic structureand thinks of the moduli of complex
tori as a“variation of period matrices”[i.e., the holomorphic parameter “z ∈ H”,
which may be taken, in the notation of (ii-b), to be “ix”o r“iy”]. By contrast, the
situation involving the set “†Yim ⊆ †Vim” discussed in (ii-c) may be regarded as
analogous to the [real analytic]Teichm¨uller approach to the theory of moduli of
complex tori [cf. the discussion of Example 3.3.1], i.e., in which theholomorphic
structure is subject toTeichm¨uller dilations [corresponding to various elements in
the set†Yim], relative to theﬁxed “real analytic” pairgiven by†Vrl, †Vim.
One central assertion of the RCS — which appears, for instance, in certain
10pp. manuscripts written by adherents of the RCS [cf., especially, the discussion
of the ﬁnal page and a halfof the ﬁles “[SS2018-05]”, “[SS2018-08]” available at
the website [Dsc2018]] — is to the eﬀect that theexistence,a si n( 1 - D i m ) ,o fa
consistent choice of a ﬁxed relationshipbetween the two dimensions of (2-Dim)

===== PAGE 71 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 71
may be derived as a consequence — i.e., in more succinct notation,
(RC-Fr´Et), (RC-log), (RC-Θ) “ =⇒ ”( 1 - D i m )
— of certain“redundant copies assertions”, as follows:
(RC-Fr´Et) the Frobenius-likeand ´etale-like versions of objects in inter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory are“redundant”, i.e., may beidentiﬁed with one
another without aﬀecting the essential logical structure of the theory;
(RC-log)t h e(Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theaterson either side of thelog-link in inter-
universal Teichm¨uller theory are“redundant”, i.e., may beidentiﬁed
with one another without aﬀecting the essential logical structure of the
theory;
(RC-Θ) the (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theaters on either side of the Θ-link in inter-
universal Teichm¨uller theory are“redundant”, i.e., may beidentiﬁed
with one another without aﬀecting the essential logical structure of the
theory.
Intheremainderofthepresent §3[cf., especially, §3.2, §3.3, §3.4], wediscussinmore
detail the falsity of each of these “RCS-redundancy” assertions [i.e., (RC-Fr´Et),
(RC-log), (RC-Θ)].
Here, it should be noted that thisfalsity of (RC-Fr´Et), (RC-log), (RC-Θ) is
by no means a diﬃcult or subtle issue, but rather a sort of matter of“belaboring
the intuitively obvious”from the point of view of mathematicians who are thor-
oughly familiar with inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory. Nevertheless, as discussed
in [Rpt2018], §17, it is apedagogically meaningful exerciseto write out and discuss
the details surrounding this sort of issue [cf. also the discussion in the ﬁnal portions
of §1.6, §1.7 of the present paper]. Moreover, as discussed in§1.5 of the present
paper, it is desirable from ahistorical point of view to produce detailed, explicit,
and readily accessible written expositions concerning this sort of issue.
This state of aﬀairs prompts the followingquestion:
Why do adherents of the RCS continue to insist on asserting the validity
of these assertions (RC-Fr´Et), (RC-log), (RC-Θ)?
Any sort of complete, deﬁnitive answer to this question lies beyond the scope of
the present paper. On the other hand, it seems natural to conjecture that one
fundamental motivation for these assertions of RCS-redundancy may be found in
the fact that
(FxRng) many arithmetic geometers haveonly experiencedworking in situations
where all schemes— or, alternatively,rings — that appear in a theory
are regarded as belonging to asingle categorythat isﬁxed throughout
the theory, hence are related to another viaring homomorphisms, i.e.,
in such a way that thering structure of the various rings involved is
always respected [cf. the discussion of §1.5, as well as the discussion of
§3.8 below].

===== PAGE 72 =====

72 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
It is not diﬃcult to imagine that theheuristics and intuitionthat result from years
[or decades!] of immersive experience in such mathematical situations could create
a mindset that is fertile ground for the RCS-redundancy assertions that will be
discussed in detail in the remainder of the present§3 [cf., especially, §3.2, §3.3,
§3.4].
Finally, we observe that this situation is, in certain respects, reminiscent of
various situations that occurred throughout thehistory of mathematics,s u c h
as, for instance, the situation that occurred in the late 19-th century with regard
to such novel [i.e., at the time] notions as the notion of anabstract manifoldor
an abstract Riemann surface.T h a ti st os a y ,
(FxEuc) from the point of view of anyone for whom it is a“ m a t t e ro fc o u r s e ”
or “common sense”that all geometry must take place withinsome ﬁxed,
static ambient Euclidean space— such as, for instance, thecomplex
plane —s u c habstract geometric notions as the notion of an abstract
manifold or abstract Riemann surface might come across asdeeply dis-
turbing and unlikely to be of use in any substantive mathematical sense
[cf. the discussion of§1.5; the discussion of [IUTchI],§I2].
In this context, it is of interest — especially from a historical point of view —
to recall that, in some sense, themost fundamental classical exampleof such an
abstract geometry is the Riemann surface that arises by applying the technique of
analytic continuationto thecomplex logarithm, i.e., which may be regarded
as a sort ofdistant ancestor[cf. the discussion of [IUTchI], Remark 5.1.4; [Alien],
§3.3, (vi)] of the log-link of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory. Another [in fact
closely related!] fundamental classical exampleof such an abstract geometry is the
hyperbolic geometry of theupper half-plane, which may also be regarded as
a sort ofdistant ancestorof numerous aspects of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory
[cf. (InfH) and Example 3.3.2 in§3.3 below, as well as the discussion of [IUTchI],
Remark 6.12.3, (iii); [IUTchIII], Remark 2.3.3, (ix), (x)].
Another historically important instance of this sort of situation may be seen
in the introduction, in the early 19-th century, ofGalois groups— i.e., of [ﬁnite]
automorphism groups ofabstract ﬁelds — as a tool for investigating the roots of
polynomial equations. That is to say,
(FxFld) until the advent ofGalois groups/abstract ﬁelds, the issue of investigat-
ing the roots of polynomial equations was always regarded — again as a
“matter of course”or “common sense”— as an issue of investigating var-
ious “exotic numbers”inside some ﬁxed, static ambient ﬁeld such as
the ﬁeld of complex numbers; moreover, from this more classical “common
sense” point of view, the idea of working withautomorphisms of abstract
ﬁelds — i.e., ﬁelds that arenot constrained[since such constraints would
rule out the existence of nontrivial automorphisms!] to be treated as sub-
sets of some ﬁxed, static ambient ﬁeld — might come across asdeeply
disturbing and unlikely to be of use in any substantive mathematical sense
[cf. the discussion of§1.5].
On the other hand, from the point of view of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory,
this radical transition
r o o t sa sc o n c r e t en u m b e r s⇝ Galois groups/abstract ﬁelds

===== PAGE 73 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 73
thatoccurredintheearly19-thcenturymayberegardedasasortof distant ancestor
of thetransition
Galois groups/abstract ﬁelds ⇝ abstract groups/anabelian algorithms
that occurs in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory [cf. the discussion at the beginning
of §3.2 below; the discussion of §3.8 below; the discussion of the ﬁnal portion of
[Alien], §4.4, (i)].
A somewhatmore recent historical exampleof this sort of situation may be seen
in the situation surrounding the introduction of [possibly non-reduced]schemes
by Grothendieckin the early 1960’s. Indeed,
(RdVar) the possible existence ofnilpotent elementsin the structure sheaf of
a non-reduced schemestruck many more classically oriented algebraic ge-
ometers, who were accustomed to working only withreduced varieties
— whose geometry could be understood intuitively in terms of their sets
of closed points—a sb e i n gentirely meaninglessand unlikely to be of use
in any substantive mathematical sense, especially since it was taken as
a “matter of course”or “common sense”that any mathematically sub-
stantive property of a varietywould most certainly necessarily bereadily
identiﬁable at the level of the set of closed points of the variety[cf. the
discussion of §1.5].
This more recent example ofnon-reduced schemesis especially of interest in the
context of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory in light of thestrong structural re-
semblances that exist between the notion ofmultiradiality in inter-universal Te-
ichm¨uller theory and the theory [due to Grothendieck!] ofcrystals [cf. [Alien],
§3.1, (v); the discussion of (CrAND) in§3.5 below; the discussion of§3.10 below].
Indeed, the “trivialization”of the theory of crystals that results from replacing
the [non-reduced!] nilpotent thickenings that appear in the theory of crystals by
the associated reduced schemes correspondsprecisely to the situation discussed in
(CrRCS) [cf. also (CrOR)] in§3.5 below.
§3.2. RCS-redundancy of Frobenius-like/´etale-like versions of objects
We begin by recalling that (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theaters — i.e., lattice points
in the log-theta-lattice — give rise to bothFrobenius-like and ´etale-like objects.
Whereas the datum of aFrobenius-likeobject depends, a priori, on the coordinates
“(n,m)” of the (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theater from which it arises, ´etale-like objects
satisfy various [horizontal/vertical] coricity properties to the eﬀect that they
map isomorphically to corresponding objects in avertically [ i nt h ec a s eo fvertical
coricity]o r horizontally [in the case ofhorizontal coricity]n e i g h b o r i n g( Θ±ellNF-
)Hodge theater of the log-theta-lattice [cf. the discussion of Example 3.2.2, (i),
(iv), below; [Alien], §2.7, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); [Alien],§2.8, 2Fr/´et; [Alien], §3.3, (ii),
(vi), (vii); [Rpt2018], §15]. Here, we recall that´etale-like objects correspond, for
the most part, to
arithmetic fundamental groups — such as, for instance, the ´etale
fundamental group“π1(X)” of a hyperbolic curveX over a number ﬁeld
or mixed characteristic local ﬁeld

===== PAGE 74 =====

74 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
— or, more generally, to objects that may bereconstructedfrom such arithmetic
fundamental groups, so long as the object is regarded as beingequipped with auxil-
iary dataconsisting of thearithmetic fundamental groupfrom which it was recon-
structed, together with thereconstruction algorithmthat was applied to reconstruct
the object. Here, we recall that, in this context, it is offundamental importance
that these arithmetic fundamental groups be treated simply asabstract topological
groups [cf. the discussion of §3.8 below for more details].´Etale-like objects also
satisfy a
crucial symmetry property with respect to permutation of adjacent
vertical linesof the log-theta-lattice
[cf. Example 3.2.2, (ii), (iv), below; [Alien],§3.2; the discussion surrounding Fig.
3.12 in [Alien],§3.6, (i)]. That is to say, in summary,
the crucialcoricity/symmetryproperties satisﬁed by´etale-likeobjects
— which are, in essence, a formal consequence of treating the arithmetic
fundamental groups that appear as abstract topological groups [cf.
the discussion of §3.8 below for more details] — play a central role in
the multiradial algorithms of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory [i.e.,
[IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11] and arenot satisﬁed by Frobenius-like ob-
jects
— cf., the discussion of Example 3.2.2, (i), (ii), (iv), below; [Alien],§2.7, (ii), (iii);
[Alien], §3.1, (iii); [Alien], Example 3.2.2; [Rpt2018],§15, (LbΘ), (Lblog), (LbMn),
(EtFr), (EtΘ), (Etlog), (EtMn).
On the other hand, once one implements theRCS-identiﬁcations discussed
in(RC- log), (RC-Θ), thereis, ineﬀect,“only one”(Θ±ellNF-)Hodgetheaterinthe
log-theta-lattice, so all issues of determining relationships between corresponding
objects in (Θ
±ellNF-)Hodge theaters at distinct coordinates “(n,m)”of the log-
theta-lattice appear, at ﬁrst glance, to have been“trivially resolved”. Put another
way,
once one implements theRCS-identiﬁcations of (RC-log), (RC-Θ), even
Frobenius-likeobjectsappear, atﬁrstglance, tosatisfy all possible coric-
ity/symmetry properties, i.e., at a more symbolic level,
(RC-log), (RC-Θ) “ =⇒ ”( R C - F r´Et).
In particular, the assertions of the RCS discussed in§3.1 and the present§3.2 may
be summarized, at a symbolic level, as follows:
(RC-log), (RC-Θ) “ =⇒ ”( R C - F r´Et), (RC-log), (RC-Θ) “ =⇒ ” (1-Dim).
In fact, however, the RCS-identiﬁcations of (RC-log), (RC-Θ) donot resolve
such issues [i.e., of relating corresponding objects in (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theaters at
distinct coordinates “(n,m)”of the log-theta-lattice] at all [cf. the discussion of
symmetries in Example 2.3.1, (iii)!], but rather merely have the eﬀect of
translating/reformulating such issues of relating corresponding objects in
(Θ±ellNF-)Hodgetheatersat distinct coordinates “(n,m)”ofthelog-theta-
lattice into issues of tracking the eﬀect on objects in (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge the-
aters as onemoves along the pathsconstituted by various composites
of Θ- andlog-links.

===== PAGE 75 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 75
On the other hand, at apurely formal level,
the discussion given above of thefalsity of (RC-Fr´Et) — i.e., as a conse-
quence of the crucialcoricity/symmetry properties discussed above —
is, in some sense, predicated on thefalsity of (RC-log), (RC-Θ).
This falsity of (RC-log), (RC-Θ) will be discussed in detail in§3.3, §3.4, below.
In this context, it is useful to observe that the situation surrounding the Θ-
link and (RC-Θ), (RC-Fr´Et) (respectively, thelog-link and (RC-log), (RC-Fr´Et))
is structurally reminiscent of the object J discussed in Examples 2.3.2, 2.4.1,
2.4.2 [cf. also the correspondences discussed in Example 2.4.5, (ii); the discussion
of [IUTchIII], Remark 1.2.2, (vi), (vii)], i.e., if one regards
(StR1) the domain of the Θ- (respectively, log-) link as corresponding to†I,
(StR2) the codomainof the Θ- (respectively, log-) link as corresponding to‡I,
(StR3) the gluing data — i.e., a certain F⊩▶×μ-prime-strip (respectively, F-
prime-strip) — that arises from thedomain (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theater of
the Θ- (respectively, log-) link as corresponding to†β= γJ,
(StR4) the gluing data — i.e., a certain F⊩▶×μ-prime-strip (respectively, F-
prime-strip) — that arises from thecodomain(Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theater of
the Θ- (respectively, log-) link as corresponding toγJ = ‡α,
(StR5) the ´etale-like objects that arecoric with respect to the Θ- (respectively,
log-) link as corresponding to theglued diﬀerentialdiscussed in (AOD3),
and
(StR6) the RCS-identiﬁcation of (RC-Θ) (respectively, (RC-log)) as correspond-
ing to the operation of passing to the quotient
J ↠ M = J/⟨†I ∼ ‡I⟩
∼
→ L = I/⟨α∼ β⟩.
This strong structural similaritywill play an important role in the discussion
of §3.3, §3.4, below.
Finally, we observe that the portion, i.e., (StR5), of this strong structural
similarity involving the glued diﬀerentialdiscussed in (AOD3) is particularly of
interest in the context of the discussion of [Alien],§2. That is to say, as discussed in
the ﬁrst paragraph of [Alien],§2.6, ´etale-likeobjects in inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory play an analogous role to the role played bytangent bundles/sheaves of
diﬀerentialsin the
(InvHt) special case of theinvarianceof theheight under isogeniesbetween
abelian varieties [due to Faltings] discussed in [Alien],§2.3, §2.4 [cf. also
[Rpt2018], §16, (DiIsm), as well as the discussion of Example 3.2.1 below;
the discussion of§3.5 below], as well as in the
(FrDﬀ) discussion ofdiﬀerentiationof p-adic liftings of theFrobenius mor-
phism g i v e ni n[ A l i e n ] ,§2.5.
The eﬃcacyof the technique of considering induced maps ondiﬀerentialsin the
various examples discussed in [Alien], §2.3, §2.4, §2.5, may also be observed in

===== PAGE 76 =====

76 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
the discussion of the fundamental theorem of calculus in §2.2, as well as in the
context of (RC-Fr´Et) and (StR5). In light of thecentral importanceof (InvHt),
as well as the closely relatedcoricity/symmetry/commutativity properties of the
log-theta-lattice [cf. the discussion at the beginning of the present §3.2, as well
as the discussion at the beginning§3.3 below], in theessential logical structure of
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, we pause to give a brief review/exposition of
(InvHt) and these closely related coricity/symmetry/commutativity properties, in
the following Examples 3.2.1, 3.2.2.
Example 3.2.1: Global multiplicative subspaces and bounds on heights.
(i) Let p be a prime number, K a ﬁnite extension of the ﬁeld Qp of p-adic
numbers, E an elliptic curveover K with bad multiplicative— i.e., in other words,
nonsmooth semi-stable — reduction over the ring of integers OK of K.W r i t e
mK ⊆O K for the maximal ideal ofOK.T h u s ,E is aTate curveand hence [cf.
the theory of [Mumf2]] may be represented, using the theory offormal schemes,a s
a sort ofquotient
“Gm/qZ
E”
of the multiplicative group schemeGm over K by the subgroup generated by the
[nonzero] q-parameter qE ∈ mK of the elliptic curveE.L e tl be a prime number.
Then the subschemeμl of l-torsion points ofGm determines, via the abovep-adic
quotient representation,a canonical exact sequence
1 −→ μl −→ E[l] −→ Z/lZ −→ 1
—w h e r ew ew r i t eE[l] ⊆ E for the subgroup scheme ofl-torsion points ofE,a n d
we observe that the generator “qE” of the group of deck transformations of the
above quotient representation determines acanonical generatorγl ∈ (E[l]/μl)(K),
up to multiplication by±1, of (E[l]/μl)(K), i.e., acanonical isomorphism,u pt o
multiplication by±1, of the quotient group schemeE[l]/μl with [the group scheme
over K determined by]Z/lZ. Thus, in summary,
the subgroup schemeE[l] ⊆ E of l-torsion points ofE is equipped with
a canonical multiplicative subspace μl (↪→ E[l] ) ,a sw e l la sw i t ha
canonical generator, uptomultiplicationby ±1, ofthequotient E[l]/μl.
(ii) Let (E,0E)b et h epointed Riemann surfacedetermined by anelliptic curve
over the ﬁeld ofcomplex numbersC.W r i t eE[∞ ]
def
= πtop
1 (E) for the [usual topologi-
cal] fundamental groupof E, relative to the basepoint determined by the origin 0E of
the given elliptic curve. Thus,E[∞ ] is a free abelian group on two generators. Let
M ⊆ E[∞ ] be a rank one [free abelian] subgroup such thatE[∞ ]/M is torsion-free.
Then M corresponds to aninﬁnite covering
EM → E
of E such that any point 0EM of EM that lifts 0E determines, up to possible compo-
sition with the inversion automorphism, an isomorphismEM
∼
→ C× of complex Lie
groups, relative to the unique complex Lie group structure on the pointed Riemann

===== PAGE 77 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 77
surface (EM,0EM) that lifts the unique complex Lie group structure on the pointed
Riemann surface (E,0E). In particular, we conclude that the choice ofM [together
with a choice of an isomorphismEM
∼
→ C× of the sort just discussed] determines a
complex holomorphic quotient representation
“C×/qZ
E”
of the given elliptic curve, together with an exact sequence
1 −→ M −→ E[∞ ] −→ Z −→ 1
— where we observe that the rank one free abelian groupE[∞ ]/M(∼= Z) is equipped
with aunique choice of generatorγ∞ ∈ E[∞ ]/M, up to multiplication by±1. Thus,
the p-adic quotient representation, as well as the associated exact sequence and
canonical generator[up to multiplication by±1], discussed in (i) may be regarded as
p-adic analoguesof thecomplex holomorphic quotient representationand associated
exact sequence/canonical generator[up to multiplication by ±1] discussed in the
present (ii).
(iii) LetF be a number ﬁeld [i.e., a ﬁnite extension of the ﬁeldQ of rational
numbers] andE an elliptic curveover F.W r i t eE[l] ⊆ E for the subgroup scheme
of l-torsion points ofE. Then, in general,
E does notnecessarilyadmita global multiplicative subspace (GMS)
M ⊆ E[l]o ra global canonical generator (GCG)γ∈ (E[l]/M)(F),
i.e., a subgroup scheme M ⊆ E[l] or generator γ∈ (E[l]/M)(F)t h a t
restricts to themultiplicative subspaceor canonical generatordiscussed in
(i) at each nonarchimedean prime ofF where E has bad multiplicative
reduction.
On the other hand, let ussuppose, for the remainder of the present (iii), that
E does admita global multiplicative subspace (GMS)M ⊆ E[l].
Write E∗def
= E/M.T h u s ,w eh a v ea nisogeny
φ: E → E∗
that, in light of the discussion of (i), together with the fact thatM ⊆ E[l]i sa
GMS, corresponds to the isogeny
“Gm/qZ
E”−→ “Gm/ql·Z
E ”
given byraising to thel-th poweron Gm at each nonarchimedean prime ofF where
E has bad multiplicative reduction. In particular, at each nonarchimedean primev
of F where E has bad multiplicative reduction,t h eq-parameterqE∗,v of E∗at v is
the l-th powerof theq-parameterqE,v of E at v, i.e.,
qE∗,v = ql
E,v.
Inparticular, ifwewritelog( q(−)) ∈ Rforthe normalized arithmetic degree“deg(−)”
[cf. the discussion preceding [GenEll], Deﬁnition 1.2] of the arithmetic divisor

===== PAGE 78 =====

78 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
determined by the q-parameters of an elliptic curve over a number ﬁeld at the
nonarchimedean primes where the elliptic curve, which we denote “(−)”, hasbad
multiplicative reduction, then we obtain therelation
log(qE∗)= l ·log(qE) ∈ R
between log(qE),log(qE∗) ∈ R.
(iv) We continue to consider the situation discussed in (iii). Write
Mell ⊇M ell
for thecompactiﬁed moduli stack of elliptic curves— or, equivalently, the moduli
stack ofpointed stable curves of type(1,1) — overZ and theopen substackobtained
by forming the complement of thedivisor at inﬁnity∞ Mell
⊆ Mell.W r i t eωMell
for
the ample line bundleon Mell determined by thecotangent spaceat the origin
of the tautological familyof one-dimensional semi-abelian schemesover Mell [i.e.,
obtained by forming the complement of the unique node of the tautological pointed
stable curve of type (1,1) overMell]. Now recall thediscriminant moduli form
ΔMell
, which may be thought of as anisomorphism of line bundles
OMell
∼
→ ω⊗12
Mell
(−∞ Mell
)
— i.e., a section ofω⊗12
Mell
over Mell that has no zeroes or poles except for a zero of
order 1 at∞ Mell
. It follows immediately from the existence of ΔMell
[cf., e.g., the
discussion of [GenEll], §3, for more details] that, if, for the sake of simplicity, we
ignore the contributions at thearchimedean primes, then we obtain therelation
ht(−) ≈ 1
6log(q(−))
—w h e r ew ew r i t eh t (−) for the normalized height associated to the ample line
bundle ω⊗2
Mell
on Mell of the point determined by an elliptic curve “(−)” deﬁned
over a number ﬁeld and “≈” to signify a relationship ofbounded discrepancy[i.e.,
that the absolute value of the diﬀerence between the left- and right-hand sides is
bounded by some positive real numberindependently of “(−)”].
(v) We continue to consider the situation discussed in (iii), (iv). Recall the
isogeny φ: E → E∗discussed in (iii). Since this isogeny is ofdegree l, hence, in
particular, ´etale over nonarchimedean primes ofF of residue characteristic̸= l,w e
conclude immediately, via astraightforward computationof the mapdφinduced on
diﬀerentialsby φ[cf. the proof of [GenEll], Lemma 3.5, for more details], that, if,
for the sake of simplicity, weignore the contributions at thearchimedean primes,
then we obtain relations
htE − log(l) ≲ htE∗ ≲ htE +log(l)
[where we use the notation “≲”t os i g n i f ya ninequality “≤” up to bounded discrep-
ancy, i.e., a relation to the eﬀect that the left-hand side is bounded,independently
of the elliptic curveE and the prime numberl, by the sum of the right-hand side

===== PAGE 79 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 79
and some positive real number] and hence, by combining the latter relation “≲”
with the relations of the ﬁnal displays of (iii), (iv), that
htE ≲ 1
l
(
htE +log(l)
)
— i.e., that htE ≲ 1
l−1log(l) ≤ 1. That is to say, in summary, if, for the sake of
simplicity, weignore the contributions at thearchimedean primes,t h e n
the assumption [cf. (iii)] thatE admits aGMS implies abound on the
height of E [i.e., htE] and hence, in particular, that, if one only considers
number ﬁelds F of bounded degreeover Q, then there areonly ﬁnitely
possibilities for the isomorphism class ofE.
This is precisely the argument given in [GenEll], Lemma 3.5, which may be regarded
as a special case of the argument given in the original proof [due to Faltings] of the
invariance of the height[up to bounded discrepancies]under isogenies of abelian
varieties.
(vi) The argument reviewed in (v) may be understood as consisting oftwo key
points, both of which are closely related to variouscentral aspectsof inter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory. Theﬁrst key pointis, of course,
(vi-a) the assumption of theexistence of aGMS [cf. (iii)], which implies that
the passageE ⇝ E∗to the quotient ofE by the GMS corresponds to a
relation
qE ↦→ ql
E
between theq-parametersof E and E∗at each nonarchimedean prime of
F where E and E∗have bad multiplicative reduction— i.e., to a relation
reminiscent of theFrobenius morphismin positive characteristic.
Here, we observe in passing that, in theabsence of this crucial assumption of the
existence of a GMS, the passage from E to some arbitrary quotient of E by a
ﬁnite subgroup scheme of rankl would give rise to relations “qE ↦→ ql
E”a tsome
nonarchimedeanprimesofbadmultiplicativereductionandtorelations“ qE ↦→ q1/l
E ”
at other nonarchimedean primes of bad multiplicative reduction — i.e., a situation
in which the argument reviewed in (v) would break down completely!I n i n t e r -
universal Teichm¨uller theory,
(vi-b) the fundamental roleplayed bytheta functions [cf. the discussion of
Examples 3.3.2, 3.8.4 below] — i.e., in themultiradial reconstruction
algorithms of the Θ-pilot “{qj2
v
}” — means that in addition to aGMS,
itwillbenecessarytosomehow “simulate”[cf. thediscussionofExample
3.8.2, (i), below] theexistence of aGCG.
Here, it is useful to recall that, from the point of view of theclassical complex theory
of theta functions[cf. also Example 3.3.2 below]
+∞∑
n=−∞
qn2
·Un

===== PAGE 80 =====

80 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
—w h e r eq,U ∈ C and |q| < 1:
· the “U” may be understood as thestandard multiplicative coor-
dinate on the inﬁnite covering “C× ∼
→ EM → E” of (ii), hence isonly
deﬁned once one has a“multiplicative subspaceM ⊆ E[∞ ]”, i.e., thecom-
plex analogueof thel-torsion multiplicative subspace“μl ⊆ E[l]” of (i), or,
alternatively, of the coverings “XK”, “CK” of [Alien],§3.3, (i), (iv), (v)
[cf. also the discussion of Example 3.8.2, (i), below];
· the“q”maybeunderstoodasthe complex q-parameterdeterminedby
a generating deck transformationof theﬁnite covering“C× ∼
→ EM → E”
of (ii), hence isonly deﬁnedonce one has a“generator, up to multiplication
by ±1,o f E[∞ ]/M”, i.e., thecomplex analogueof thel-torsion canonical
generator “γl ∈ (E[l]/μl)(K)”, up to multiplication by±1, or, alterna-
tively, the index “j =1 ”i nt h eΘ-pilot “{qj2
v
}” of [Alien],§3.3, (vii) [cf.
also the discussion of Example 3.8.2, (i), below; the discussion of Example
3.8.4, (vi), below].
(vii) Thesecond key pointof the argument reviewed in (v)
(vii-a) consists of the computation of dφdiscussed at the beginning of (v) —
i.e., a computation that essentially amounts to the computation of the
logarithmic derivative
dlog(U)= dU
U ↦→ l ·dlog(U)
of the isogeny φ, written as “U ↦→ Ul” in terms of thestandard multi-
plicative coordinate“U”o nGm [cf. (i), (iii)] — which, in light of the
ampleness of ωMell
[cf. (iv)], implies that
“ωMell
|E ≈ ωMell
|E∗”
[i.e., the“roughlyisomorphic”arithmeticlinebundlesobtainedbyrestrict-
ing ωMell
to E, E∗] serves, up to anegligible discrepancy,a sa common
container for themoduli of bothE and E∗, i.e., in light of the existence
of the discriminant modular form “ΔMell
” [cf. (iv)], as acommon
container for both “qE”a n d“ql
E”.
Here, we observe that this“common container”/amplenessaspect of ωMell
may
be understood as corresponding — cf. the analogy between´etale-like objects in
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory and tangent bundles/sheaves of diﬀeren-
tialsthatwasrecalledaboveinthecontextof(InvHt), (FrDﬀ)! —ininter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory, to
(vii-b) thetheoryofthe log-link/log-shellsandcloselyrelated mono-anabelian
reconstruction algorithms in a vertical line of the log-theta-lattice
that give rise to the log-Kummer-correspondence of inter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory, i.e., which play thefundamental role of furnishing a
multiradial container for the Frobenius-like Θ-pilot at the lattice
point (0,0) of the log-theta-lattice [cf. the discussion of§3.6, §3.9, §3.10,
§3.11, below!].

===== PAGE 81 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 81
Finally, in passing, we note that thediscriminant modular form“ΔMell
”i sa l s o
reminiscent of theclassical complex theta functionof Example 3.3.2 below [i.e.,
which may also be regarded as amodular formon theupper half-plane], as well as
of the discussion of the relationship between thediscriminant modular formand
scheme-theoretic Hodge-Arakelov theory in the ﬁnal portion of [HASurI],
§1.2 [cf. also [Alien], Example 2.14.3; [Alien],§3.9, (i), (ii), for a discussion of the
relationship between scheme-theoretic Hodge-Arakelov theoryand inter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory].
(viii) Thus, one may summarize the discussion of the present Example 3.2.1 as
follows:
At a very rough, introductory/expository level, one may think ofinter-
universal Teichm¨uller theory as a sort of generalization of the ap-
proach of (InvHt) [cf. (v)] tobounding heights of elliptic curves over
number ﬁelds to the case of[essentially] arbitrary elliptic curves over
number ﬁelds [i.e., which arenot assumed to admit a GMS!] by
· somehow “simulating”a GMS/GCG and
· applying the theory oftheta functionsand mono-anabelian
geometry.
Example 3.2.2: Coricity, symmetry, and commutativity properties of the
log-theta-lattice. In the following discussion, we ﬁx notation as follows: Letk
be a ﬁnite extension of Qp, for some prime numberp; k an algebraic closureof k;
q ∈ k a nonzero elementof the maximal idealmk of the ring of integersOk of k;
N ≥ 2 an integer. Write
· N for the additive monoid of nonnegative integers;
· Gk
def
= Gal(k/k);
·O k for the ring of integers ofk, with maximal idealmk ⊆O k;
·O ⊿
k ⊆O k for the multiplicative monoid of nonzero elements ofOk;
·O ×
k ⊆O ⊿
k for the group of invertible elements ofO⊿
k ;
·O ×
k ↠ O×μ
k , k
×
↠ k
×μ
, k ↠ k
μ
for the respective quotients ofO×
k ,
k
×μ
, k
μ
by the action of the groupμ∞ of torsion elements [i.e.,roots of
unity]o f O×
k ;
·F n
def
= O×μ
k × (qn)N ⊆ k
×μ
for the multiplicative submonoid of k
×μ
[equipped with a natural action byGk] generated byO×μ
k and qn,w h e r e
we allown to be an arbitrary positive integer, and, by a slight abuse of
notation, we write “q” for the image ofq ∈ mk in k
×μ
;
· Θk : FN
∼
→F 1 for theisomorphism ofGk-monoids that restricts to the
identity isomorphismon O×μ
k and mapsqN ↦→ q;
· logk : O×
k ↠ k for thep-adic logarithmon O×
k .

===== PAGE 82 =====

82 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Thus, Gk acts naturally onO×μ
k ↞ O×
k ⊆O ⊿
k ⊆O k.L e tΠ↠ Gk be atopological
group equipped with a surjection ontoGk, which determines natural actions of Π
on O×μ
k ↞ O×
k ⊆O ⊿
k ⊆O k.
(i) We begin by observing the following properties:
(i-a) The isomorphism
Θk : FN
∼
→F 1
is not compatiblewith thering structuresin its domain/codomain in
the sense that it doesnot arise from aGk-equivariant ring homomorphism
φ: k↪ → k, i.e., there doesnot exist aGk-equivariant ring homomorphism
φ: k↪ → k for which the induced mapk
×μ
→ k
×μ
restricts either to a map
FN →F 1 that coincides with Θk or to a mapF1 →F N that coincides
with Θ−1
k .
(i-b) The map
logk : O×
k → k
is not compatiblewith thering structuresin its domain/codomain in
the sense that it doesnot arise from aGk-equivariant ring homomorphism
φ: k↪ → k, i.e., there doesnot exist aGk-equivariant ring homomorphism
φ: k↪ → k that restricts to logk.
Indeed, both (i-a) and (i-b) follow immediately from the easily veriﬁed elementary
fact that anyGk-equivariant ring homomorphismφ: k↪ → k induces [by passing
to Gk-invariants and considering thel-divisibility properties of units/non-units of
k, for prime numbersl ̸= p]a nisomorphism of topological ﬁeldsk
∼
→ k, hence an
isomorphism between thevalue groupsof the copies ofk in the domain/codomain.
[Here, we recall that, sinceN ≥ 2, the assignments
qN ↦→ q [cf. (i-a)] and ( O×
k ∋)1+ p2 ↦→ logk(1+ p2)( ∈ p ·Ok)[ c f . ( i - b ) ]
yield immediate contradictions to the existence of such aninduced isomorphism
between value groups.] By contrast, we observe that
(i-c) the isomorphism Θ k : FN
∼
→F 1 is compatible — in the sense of
equivariance, relative to the natural actions on the domain/codomain of
Θk —w i t ha nisomorphism Gk
∼
→ Gk b e t w e e nt h ec o p i e so fGk in the
domain/codomain of Θk;
(i-d) the map logk : O×
k → k is compatible — in the sense ofequivariance,
relative to the natural actions on the domain/codomain of logk —w i t ha n
isomorphism Π
∼
→ Π between the copies of Π in the domain/codomain
of logk.
Indeed, (i-c) and (i-d) follow immediately from the various deﬁnitions involved.
Here, we recall, however, that it is offundamental importanceto observe the fol-
lowing:
(i-e) Since Θk and logk are not compatible with the respectivering struc-
tures in their domains/codomains [cf. (i-a), (i-b)!], in order to obtain

===== PAGE 83 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 83
coric structures — i.e., structures that arecommonly shared,i na n in-
variant fashion, by these domains/codomains, hence well-deﬁned in a
sense that is independent of any speciﬁcation of a relationshipto these
domains/codomains — it is necessary to regard
· the isomorphisms
Gk
∼
→ Gk and Π
∼
→ Π
as indeterminate isomorphisms of abstract groups, i.e.,
not of Galois groups, that is to say, groups equipped with the
“Galois-rigidiﬁcation”constituted by the auxiliary data of some
sort ofaction on aﬁeld/ring;
· the “identity isomorphism”given by restricting Θk to O×μ
k
O×μ
k
∼
→O ×μ
k
as anindeterminate isomorphism of topological monoids
equipped with an action by atopological group [i.e., Gk], as
well as with the collection ofsubmonoids given by the images
in O×μ
k of the intersections O×
k ∩ k
H
[i.e., of O×
k with the H-
invariantsk
H
⊆ k of k], whereH ranges over the open subgroups
of Gk
— cf. the discussion of§3.8 below. These coricity properties will also play
an important role in the context of the discussion of (ii-c) below.
In the context of (i-e), it is also important to note the following:
(i-f) The use of the terminology “identity isomorphism”when referring
to any of the isomorphisms
Gk
∼
→ Gk,Π
∼
→ Π, O×μ
k
∼
→O ×μ
k
discussed in (i-e) can behighly misleading and give rise tounnecessary
confusion, for the following reason: Strictly speaking, throughout mathe-
matics, this terminology “identity isomorphism” is only well-deﬁned when
applied to an isomorphism from a mathematical object toitself [i.e., not
to a distinct mathematical object!]. Since, however, the ring structures
in the domain/codomain of Θk or logk must be distinguished [i.e., so
long as they are related to one another via Θk or logk — cf. (i-a), (i-b),
as well as the discussion of §3.4 below!], the only possible “well-deﬁned
sense”in which this terminology “identity isomorphism” may be applied
is the sense of referring to some sort of “identity isomorphism” between
weaker underlying structures[i.e., such as“sets”, “abstract topological
groups”, “abstract topological monoids”, etc. — cf. the discussion of§3.8
below] thatdo indeed coincide, hence may indeed be“identiﬁed”with one
another [cf. the situations discussed in Example 3.5.2 below].
The observations of (i-e) and (i-f) play afundamental rolein the essential logical
structure of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory.

===== PAGE 84 =====

84 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(ii) Next, we observe the following properties:
(ii-a) The isomorphism
Θk : FN
∼
→F 1
is not symmetricwith respect to switching thedomain/codomain in
the following sense: there do not exist Gk-equivariant ring homomor-
phisms φ: k↪ → k, ψ: k↪ → k such that the induced mapsφ×μ : k
×μ
→
k
×μ
, ψ×μ : k
×μ
→ k
×μ
ﬁt into a diagram
k
×μ
⊇F N
Θk
−→ F 1 ⊆ k
×μ
⏐⏐
↓
φ×μ
⏐⏐
↓
ψ×μ
k
×μ
⊇F 1
Θk
←− F N ⊆ k
×μ
that iscommutative on theportion of thediagram on which the relevant
composites are deﬁned.
(ii-b) The isomorphism
logk : O×
k
∼
→ k
is not symmetricwith respect to switching thedomain/codomain in
the following sense: there do not exist Gk-equivariant ring homomor-
phisms φ: k↪ → k, ψ: k↪ → k that ﬁt into a diagram
k ⊇O ×
k
logk
−→ k
⏐⏐
↓
φ
⏐
⏐
↓
ψ
k
logk
←− O ×
k ⊆ k
that iscommutative on theportion of thediagram on which the relevant
composites are deﬁned.
Indeed, (ii-a) follows by tracing the image, at the level ofvalue groups,o ft h eqN
in theupper left-hand cornerof the diagram, i.e., which maps [cf. the discussion of
induced isomorphisms of value groupsfollowing (i-a), (i-b)] toq via the composite
of theupper horizontaland right-hand verticalarrows, but toqN 2
(̸= qN) via the
composite of theleft-hand verticaland lower horizontal arrows. In a similar vein,
(ii-b) follows by tracing the image, at the level ofvalue groups, of the element
u
def
= {exp(p2)}
1
p2
∈O ×
k
[where “exp(−)” denotes the well-known formal power series of the exponential
function, and the “1
p2 ” denotes ap2-root of the element “{−}”] in theupper left-
hand cornerof the diagram, i.e., which maps to 0 via the composite of theupper
horizontal, right-hand vertical,a n dlower horizontalarrows, but tou (̸= 0) via the
left-hand verticalarrow. By contrast, we observe the following:
(ii-c) The topological group actionssurrounding Θk [cf. (i-c)]
Π ↠ Gk
∼
→ Gk ↞ Π
↷↷
FN
Θk
−→ F 1

===== PAGE 85 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 85
yield adiagram
Π ↠ Gk
∼
→ Gk ↞ Π
that is [manifestly!]symmetric with respect to applying the operation of
reﬂection of this last diagram around the “
∼
→ ”, where we observe that
this symmetry property only holdsif thecoricity properties discussed in
(i-e), (i-f) are applied, i.e., if
· the isomorphism of topological groupsGk
∼
→ Gk is regarded
as anindeterminate isomorphism of abstract topological
groups and
· the arrows “↠”/“↞” are regarded assurjections between
abstract topological groups, i.e., topological groups that are
only well-deﬁned up toindeterminate isomorphism.
Indeed, if one does not apply these coricity properties, then one is in
eﬀect working with structures [i.e., the various “Π” and “Gk”i n“ Π↠
Gk
∼
→ Gk ↞ Π”] thatdepend on Galois-rigidiﬁcations that arise from
structures speciﬁc to thedomain or codomainof Θk, hence donot satisfy
the desiredsymmetry property [cf. the discussion of (i-e), (i-f)!].
The observation (ii-c), together with the observations (i-e) and (i-f), plays afunda-
mental rolein theessential logical structure of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory.
(iii) Next, we observe the following properties:
(iii-a) Θ k does not commute with logk — i.e., at a purely formal level,
“Θk ◦ logk ̸=l o gk ◦ Θk” — in the following sense: there donot exist
Gk-equivariant ring homomorphismsφ: k↪ → k, ψ: k↪ → k such that the
induced mapsφμ : k
μ
→ k
μ
, ψμ : k
μ
→ k
μ
ﬁt into a diagram
O×μ
k ⊆F N
Θk
−→ F 1 ⊇O ×μ
k⏐⏐↓logk
⏐⏐↓logk
k k
⏐⏐↓φμ|k
⏐⏐↓ψμ|k
k
μ
⊇F N
Θk
−→ F 1 ⊆ k
μ
that iscommutative on theportion of thediagram on which the relevant
composites are deﬁned.
(iii-b) Θk is not invariant with respect to logk — i.e., at a purely formal
level,“ Θk ◦logk ̸=Θk” — in the following sense: there donot exist Gk-
equivariant ring homomorphisms φ: k↪ → k, ψ: k↪ → k such that the
induced mapsφμ : k
μ
→ k
μ
, ψμ : k
μ
→ k
μ
ﬁt into a diagram
O×μ
k ⊆F N
Θk
−→ F 1 ⊇O ×μ
k⏐⏐↓logk
⏐⏐↓ιk
k k
μ
⏐⏐↓φμ|k
⏐⏐↓ψμ
k
μ
⊇F N
Θk
−→ F 1 ⊆ k
μ

===== PAGE 86 =====

86 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
—w h e r eιk : O×μ
k ↪→ k
μ
denotes the natural inclusion — that iscommu-
tative on theportion of thediagram on which the relevant composites are
deﬁned.
Indeed, letm be a positive integer such thatpm ·Ok ⊆ logk(O×
k ) ⊆ p−m ·Ok,w h e r e
we write O×
k
def
= Ok ∩O ×
k . Then (iii-a) follows by tracing the image of the element
un
def
=e x p (pn·N) ∈O ×
k
[where “exp(−)” denotes the well-known formal power series of the exponential
function, andn is any positive integer> 2m [which implies thatn<n +(n− 2m)=
2n − 2m ≤ n · N − 2m] such thatpn ∈ qN ·O ×
k ]i nt h eupper left-hand portionof
the diagram, i.e., which maps [cf. the discussion ofinduced isomorphisms of value
groups following (i-a), (i-b)] to [the image in thevalue groupof k of] some nonzero
element ∈ pn·N−2m ·Ok [cf. the discussion of (i-e), as well as of Example 3.5.1 below]
via the composite of theupper horizontaland right-hand verticalarrows, but to [the
image in thevalue groupof k of] pn (̸∈ pn·N−2m ·Ok) via theleft-hand verticaland
lower horizontalarrows. In a similar vein, (iii-b) follows by tracing the image of the
same element un ∈O ×
k in the upper left-hand portionof the diagram, i.e., which
maps [cf. the discussion of induced isomorphisms of value groupsfollowing (i-a),
(i-b)] to [the image in thevalue groupof k of] un via the composite of theupper
horizontal and right-hand verticalarrows, but to [the image in thevalue groupof k
of] pn (̸= un) via theleft-hand verticaland lower horizontalarrows.
(iv) Finally, we observe that it is now anessentially formal/routinematter to
translate the various elementary properties discussed above in (i), (ii), (iii) into the
corresponding coricity/symmetry/commutativity properties of the log-theta-
lattice, i.e.:
· theincompatibilitywiththe ring structuresinthe domain/codomain
[cf. the discussion at the beginning of the present§3.2; the discussion at
the beginning of §3.8 below] of the Θ-link [cf. (i-a)] and log-link [cf.
(i-b)];
· the horizontal [cf. (i-c)] and vertical [cf. (i-d)] coricity [cf. (i-
e), (i-f)] properties of the´etale-like structures that appear in the log-
theta-lattice [cf. the discussion at the beginning of the present§3.2; the
discussion at the beginning of§3.8 below];
· thenon-symmetricitywithrespecttoswitchingthe domain/codomain
[cf. the discussion at the beginning of the present§3.2] of the Θ-link [cf.
(ii-a)] and log-link [cf. (ii-b)];
· the symmetricity with respect to the Θ-link [cf. the discussion at
the beginning of the present §3.2] of the ´etale-like structures of the
log-theta-lattice [cf. (ii-c)];
· the non-commutativity of the log-theta-lattice [cf. (iii-a); the discus-
sion at the beginning§3.3 below];
· the non-invarianceof the Θ-link with respect to thelog-link [cf. (iii-
b); the discussion at the beginning§3.3 below].

===== PAGE 87 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 87
§3.3. RCS-redundant copies in the domain/codomain of thelog-link
The Θ-link of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory is deﬁned, in the style of
classical complex Teichm¨uller theory [cf. Example 3.3.1 below; [IUTchI], Remark
3.9.3], as a deformation of the ring structure in a (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theater
that depends, in an essential way, on thesplitting into unit groups and value
groups of the various localizations of the number ﬁeld involved. On the other
hand, the log-link of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory [i.e., in essence, thep-adic
logarithm at primes of the number ﬁeld of residue characteristicp] has the eﬀect of
juggling/rotating these unit groups and value groups, e.g., by mappingunits to
non-units [cf., e.g., the discussion of [Alien], Example 2.12.3, (v)]. In particular,
there isno natural wayto relate thetwo Θ-links [i.e., thetwo horizon-
tal arrows in the following diagram] that emanate from thedomain and
codomainof the log-link [i.e., theleft-hand vertical arrowin the following
diagram]
•
Θ
−→ •
↑⏐
⏐
log
...
??...•
Θ
−→ •
— that is to say, there isno natural candidatefor “??” [i.e., such as, for instance,
an isomorphism or the log-link between the two bullets “•”o nt h eright-hand side
of the diagram] that makes the diagramcommute. Indeed, it is an easy exercise
[cf. Example 3.2.2, (iii), (iv); [Alien], §3.3, (ii); [Rpt2018], §15, (LbΘ), (Lblog),
(LbMn)], to show thatneither of these candidates for “??” [i.e., anisomorphism
or the log-link] yields a commutative diagram.
T h u s ,i ns u m m a r y ,a n yidentiﬁcation of thedomain and codomain of the log-
link [cf. (RC-log)!] yields a situation in which thelocal splittingsinto unit groups
and value groups of the resulting identiﬁed “•’s” areno longer well-deﬁned.I n
particular,
any suchidentiﬁcation of the domain and codomain of the log-link [cf.
(RC-log)!] yields a situation in which the Θ-link is not well-deﬁned
— i.e., a situation in which the apparatus of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory
completely ceases to function— cf. the discussion of thedeﬁnition of theΘ-link in
the latter half of [Alien],§3.3, (ii), as well as the discussion of Example 3.3.3, (i),
below. This discussion may be summarized, at a symbolic level, as follows:
deﬁnition of the Θ-link = ⇒ falsity of (RC-log).
Next, we observe [cf. the discussion of [IUTchI], Remark 3.9.3, (iii), (iv)] that
the non-existence of a solution for “??” in the above diagram [i.e., that makes
the diagramcommute]a m o u n t s ,a tastructural level, to essentially thesame phe-
nomenon as theincompatibility of thedilations that appear inclassical complex
Teichm¨uller theorywith multiplicationbynon-real roots of unity[cf. Example
3.3.1 below]. WriteR, C, respectively, for the topological ﬁelds of real and complex
numbers. Then as observed in the discussion of the latter half of [Alien],§3.3, (ii)
[cf., especially, the discussion surrounding [Alien], Fig. 3.6]:

===== PAGE 88 =====

88 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
... ...
↑⏐
⏐
log
↑
⏐
⏐
log
...
Θ
−→ •
Θ
−→ •
Θ
−→ ...
↑⏐
⏐
log
↑
⏐
⏐
log
...
Θ
−→ •
Θ
−→ •
Θ
−→ ...
↑⏐
⏐
log
↑
⏐
⏐
log
...
Θ
−→ •
Θ
−→ •
Θ
−→ ...
↑⏐⏐log
↑⏐⏐log
... ...
⊇
... ...
↑⏐
⏐
log
↑
⏐
⏐
log
••
↑⏐
⏐
log
↑
⏐
⏐
log
•
Θ
−→ •
↑⏐
⏐
log
↑
⏐
⏐
log
••
↑⏐⏐log
↑⏐⏐log
... ...
(InfH) this structural similarityis consistent with theanalogy discussed inloc.
cit. between
· the “inﬁnite H” portion of the log-theta-lattice consisting
of the two vertical lines [i.e., of log-links] on either side of a
horizontal arrow[i.e., a Θ-link] of the log-theta-lattice and
· the elementary theory surrounding thebijection
C×\GL+
2 (R)/C× ∼
→ [0,1)
(λ0
01
)
↦→ λ−1
λ+1
—w h e r eλ ∈ R≥1; GL+
2 (R) denotes the group of 2 × 2r e a l
matrices of positive determinant;C× denotes the multiplicative
group of C, which we regard as a subgroup ofGL+
2 (R) via the
assignment a+ib ↦→
(ab
−ba
)
,f o ra,b ∈ R such that (a,b) ̸=( 0,0);
the domain of the bijection is the set of double cosets.
That is to say,
· the dilation
(λ0
01
)
—c f .t h edilations that appear in classical
complex Teichm¨uller theory, i.e., as reviewed in Example 3.3.1
below — corresponds to the Θ-link p o r t i o no fa n“inﬁnite H”
[cf. Example 3.3.2, (iii), below], while
· the two copies of the group oftoral rotations“C×” [e.g., by
roots of unity inC×] on either side of “GL+
2 (R) ”—w h i c hm a y
be thought of as a representation of theholomorphic structuresin
the domain and codomain of thedilation
(λ0
01
)
[cf. the discussion
of Example 3.3.1 below] — correspond, respectively, to the two
vertical linesof log-links in the“inﬁnite H”on either side of the
Θ-link [cf. the discussion of Example 3.3.2, (iv), below].

===== PAGE 89 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 89
Example 3.3.1: Classical complex Teichm¨uller theory. Let λ∈ R>1.R e -
call the most fundamental deformation of complex structurein classical complex
Teichm¨uller theory
Λ: C → C
C ∋ z = x+iy ↦→ ζ= ξ+iη
def
= λ·x+iy ∈ C
—w h e r ex,y ∈ R.L e tn ≥ 2 be an integer,ωa primitive n-th root of unity.W r i t e
(ω∈) μn ⊆ C for the group ofn-th roots of unity. Thenobserve that
if n ≥ 3, then there doesnot exist ω′ ∈ μn such that Λ(ω·z)= ω′ ·Λ(z)
for allz ∈ C.
[Indeed, this observation follows immediately from the fact that ifn ≥ 3, then
ω̸∈ R.] That is to say, in words,
Λi snot compatible with multiplication byμn unless n = 2 [in which
case ω= −1].
This incompatibility with “indeterminacies”arising from multiplication byμn,
for n ≥ 3, may be understood as one fundamental reason for thespecial roleplayed
by square diﬀerentials[i.e., as opposed ton-th power diﬀerentials, forn ≥ 3] in
classical complex Teichm¨uller theory [cf. the discussion of [IUTchI], Remark 3.9.3,
(iii), (iv)].
Example 3.3.2: The Jacobi identity for the classical theta function.
(i) Write z = x + iy for the standard coordinate on theupper half-plane
H
def
= {z = x+iy ∈ C | y> 0}. Recall thetheta functionon H
Θ(q)
def
=
+∞∑
n=−∞
q
1
2n2
.
—w h e r ew ew r i t eq
def
= e2πiz. Restricting to theimaginary axis[i.e., x = 0] yields
a function
θ(t)
def
=
+∞∑
n=−∞
e−πn2t.
—w h e r ew ew r i t et
def
= y.
(ii) Next, let us observe that
ι
def
=
( 01
−10
)
∈ C× ⊆ GL+(R)
maps z ↦→− z−1, henceiy ↦→ iy−1, i.e.,t ↦→ t−1,w h i l e ,f o rλ∈ R≥1,
(λ0
01
)
∈ C× ⊆ GL+(R)

===== PAGE 90 =====

90 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
maps z ↦→ λ·z, henceiy ↦→ iλ·y, i.e.,t ↦→ λ·t.
(iii) Next, we observe the following:
· As t → +∞ , the terms in the series forθ(t)a r erapidly decreasing,
and θ(t) → +0. In particular, the series for θ(t) is relatively easy to
compute.
· As t → +0, the terms in the series forθ(t) decrease very slowly,
and θ(t) → +∞ . In particular, the series for θ(t)i s very diﬃcult to
compute.
Thus, in summary, the“ﬂow/dilation”
(λ0
01
)
along the imaginary axis may be re-
garded as a sort of“link”, in the context of thetheta functionθ(t), betweensmall
values [i.e., θ(t) → +0 ast → +∞ ]a n dlarge values[i.e., θ(t) → +∞ as t → +0].
That is to say, this ﬂow/dilation along the imaginary axis behaves in a way that
is strongly reminiscentof the Θ-link of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory [cf. the
discussion of (InfH)].
(iv) TheJacobi identityfor thetheta functionθ(t)
θ(t)= t
−1
2 ·θ(t−1)
allows one to analyze the behavior ofθ(t)a s t → +0, which is very diﬃcult to
compute [cf. (iii)], in terms of the behavior ofθ(t)a st → +∞ , which is relatively
easy to compute[cf. (iii)] — cf. the discussion of theJacobi identityin [Pano], §3,
§4; [Alien], §4.1, (i). Observe that this identity may be understood as a sort of
invariance with respect toι[cf. (ii)], up to a certaineasily computed factor[i.e.,
t−1
2 ]. Note thatι“juggles”,o r“rotates/permutes”, the two dimensions ofR2.T h i s
aspect of ιis strongly reminiscent of the log-link of inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory, which“juggles”,o r “rotates/permutes”, the two underlying dimensions of
the ring structures in a vertical column of the log-theta-lattice [cf., e.g., the discus-
sion of [Alien], Example 2.12.3, (v)]. By contrast, we note that the theta function
θ(t)d o e snot satisfy any interesting properties ofinvariance with respect to the
dilations
(
λ0
01
)
.
(v) Relative to the analogy with the Θ-link and log-link of inter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory discussed in (iii), (iv), the ι-invariance interpretation of the
Jacobi identity discussed in (iv) isstrongly reminiscentof the central role played
by log-link invariance in the construction of themultiradial representation
in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory [cf. the discussion surrounding (logORInd),
(Di/NDi) in §3.11 below; the discussion of theJacobi identity in [Pano], §3, §4].
Here, we note that the factor t−1
2 in the Jacobi identity may be understood as
corresponding, relative to the analogy with inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, to
the indeterminacies (Ind1), (Ind2), (Ind3) acting on thelog-shells in the multiradial
representation. Indeed, both
· the factor t−1
2 in the Jacobi identity— which amounts, in essence,
to the well-known interpretation of the theta functionθ(t)a sa modular
form on H —a n d
· the log-shells in the multiradial representation — cf. the discussion
of the relationship betweenscheme-theoretic Hodge-Arakelov theoryand

===== PAGE 91 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 91
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory in [Alien], Example 2.14.3; [Alien],§3.9,
(i), (ii) —
are closely related to the notion of“diﬀerentials”.
(vi) At a more technical level, the crucialι-invariance property of (iv), (v)
may be understood as a consequence of theFourier transform invariance of
the Gaussian “e−□2
” on the real line [cf. the discussion of theJacobi identity
in [Pano], §3, §4]. This Fourier transform invariancein turn may be understood
as a consequence of thequadratic form “□2” in the exponent of the Gaussian
“e−□2
”, which may be thought of as theﬁrst Chern classof the ample line bundle
whose section determines, via the canonicaltheta trivializationof the line bundle,
the theta function under consideration [cf. the classical theory of complex theta
functions as exposed, for instance, in [Mumf1], Chapter I]. When this quadratic
form “□2” is multiplied by afactor t ∈ R>0, application of theFourier transform
gives rise, up to suitable factors [involving, in particular, theGaussian integral!
— cf. the discussion of (v), as well as [Alien],§3.8], to the transformation
e−t·□2
⇝ e−t−1·□2
that underlies theJacobi identity. In this context, it is of central importance to
observe that the transformation “t ⇝ t−1” in the above display [i.e., as opposed to
a transformation of the form “t ⇝ c · t−1”, for somec ∈ R>0]i s indicative of —
and indeed in some sense essentiallyequivalent to — anabsolute notion of “1”
[i.e., the unique invariant element of the transformation R>0 ∋ t ↦→ t−1 ∈ R>0]
in the copy of the real numbers that appears in the exponent “− □2”o f“e−□2
”.
Finally, we observe that thefundamental roleplayed by the quadratic form “□2”
of the above discussion in the proof of theFourier transform invariance of the
Gaussian that underlies the Jacobi identity is strongly reminiscentof the crucial
rigidity properties in the theory of the´etale theta function [cf. [Alien], §3.4,
(iii), (iv); the discussion of the Jacobi identity in [Pano], §3, §4] that underlie
the multiradial representation of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory: Indeed,
these rigidity properties may be understood as consequences of thetheta group
symmetries, which also arise, in essence, from the ´etale-theoretic version of the
quadratic form “□2” of the above discussion [cf. the discussion at the end of [Alien],
§3.4, (iv)].
(vii) Before continuing our discussion, we pause brieﬂy to make the following
elementary observation:
Let V be a 1-dimensional R-vector space.T h e na[topological] ring/ﬁeld
structure on V may be understood as amultiplication mapV ⊗R V
∼
→ V
g i v e nb ya ni s o m o r p h i s mo fR-vector spaces. By tensoring with the dual
vector space toV, one veriﬁes immediately that such a multiplication map
may be understood as an isomorphism ofR-vector spacesV
∼
→ R, i.e., as
t h ec h o i c eo fanonzero elementin V given by theimage of1 ∈ R.
In particular, it follows immediately from this elementary observation that the
absolute notion of “1 ∈ R”discussed in (vi) may be interpreted as a [topological]
ring/ﬁeld structureon the copy of the real numbers that appears in the exponent

===== PAGE 92 =====

92 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
“(−)” of the Gaussian “e(−)”. This interpretation isstrongly reminiscentof the
central importance, in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, of working with theﬁrst
power of [the reciprocal of the l-th root of] the theta function [cf., e.g., the
discussion of [Alien], §3.4, (iii)], which makes it possible to consider thetruncated
“mod N” Kummer theoryof the theta function: indeed, this truncatibility of
the Kummer theory of the theta function is closely related to the [topological]
ring/ﬁeld structure of the local ﬁelds that appear in the context of thelog-link
of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory [cf. the analogy between thelog-link and “ι”
discussed in (iv); the discussion of Example 3.8.4 below; the discussion of the ﬁnal
portion of [Alien],§3.6, (ii)].
(viii) Another important technical aspect of theFourier transformdiscussed
in (vi) is thefactor “eixy”[where x,y ∈ R] that appears in this Fourier transform.
Indeed,
· this “exponentiation of a complex unit ∈ S1 ⊆ C×”to a power
given by some indeterminate real number — i.e., the real number
that corresponds to the variable of integration in the Fourier ransform —
is strongly reminiscentof
· the (Ind2) indeterminacyaction on thelocal units“O×μ”i ni n t e r -
universal Teichm¨uller theory — i.e., which amounts, in essence, toexpo-
nentiation of these local unitsto a power given by someindeterminate
element ∈ ˆZ×
[cf. the discussion of the Jacobi identity in [Pano], §3, §4]. Moreover, in this
context, it is of interest to note that theintegration that occurs in the Fourier
transform may be understood as corresponding to thelogical OR/XOR “∨/˙∨”
aspect of the indeterminacies that occur in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory —
cf. the correspondence of logical XOR “˙∨”with addition [where we recall that
“integration”may be understood as a sort of“topological addition”operation], as
discussed in Example 2.4.6, (iii), as well as in (∧(˙∨)-Chn) in §3.10 below.
Example 3.3.3: Theta functions and multiplicative structures.
(i) Onefundamental reasonfor thecentral roleplayed bytheta functionsin
the essential logical structureof inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory lies in the fact
that
(ThMlt) the main properties of interest of the theta functionsthat appear in
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory — most notably,
(ZrPl) the well-known description of thezeroes/poles of theta func-
tions at the cusps [cf. [EtTh], Proposition 1.4, (i); [IUTchIII],
Remark 2.3.3, (vi), (vii); [Alien],§3.4, (iii)], which yields — by
applyingthewell-knownintersectiontheory ofdivisorssupported
on the special ﬁber of the universal topological coveringof the
Tate curve[cf. the discussion preceding [EtTh], Proposition 1.1,
of divisors supported on thespecial ﬁber]—a “divisor-theoretic”

===== PAGE 93 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 93
characterization of these theta functions [up to translation by a
deck transformation of the universal topological covering];
(SymTh) the well-known symmetries of theta functions [cf. [EtTh],
Proposition 1.4, (ii)];
(GalEv) the Kummer-compatible Galois evaluationproperties of
theta functions [cf. [IUTchII], Remark 1.12.4; the discussion at
the beginning of [Alien],§3.6; [EtTh], Remark 1.10.4, (i)], which
give rise to thecanonical splittingsof theta monoids,a sw e l la st o
the construction of theGaussian monoids[cf. [IUTchII], Corol-
laries 2.5, 2.6, 3.5, 3.6; [Alien],§3.4, (iii); [Alien],§3.6, (ii)]
—m a yb eexpressed entirely in terms of themultiplicative structures
of the various ringsthat appear, i.e.,without invoking the additive struc-
tures of these rings.
This expressibility purely in terms of multiplicative structuresplays anessential role
in establishing the
· multiradial unit group/value group splittings/decouplings[cf.
[IUTchII], Remark 1.12.2, (vi); [Alien],§3.4, (iii)] and
· non-interference properties [cf. [Alien], §3.7, (i)]
that underlie thedeﬁnition of the Θ-link [cf. the discussion of the present§3.3 pre-
ceding (InfH)] andlog-Kummer-correspondence [cf. [IUTchII], Remark 1.12.2,
(iv); [IUTchIII], Remark 1.2.3].
(ii) In the context of (ZrPl), it is important to recall thecentral importanceof
the fact that
(ZrPlOrd) the signed order[i.e., “+” forzeroes,“ −”f o rpoles] of the theta function
at each of the cusps isprecisely one[cf. [IUTchIII], Remark 2.3.3, (vi),
(vii); [Alien], §3.4, (iii)].
This property (ZrPlOrd) of the theta functions that appear in inter-universal Te-
ichm¨uller theory is closely related to the properties discussed in Example 3.3.2,
(vi), (vii), in the case ofcomplex theta functions. In inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory, this property (ZrPlOrd) ensures that themono-theta-theoretic cyclo-
tomic rigidityalgorithms that arise from the theory oftheta functionsare
· compatible with thetopology of thetempered fundamental group
and, moreover, are
· not subject to {±1}-indeterminacies
— properties that arenot satisﬁed by the cyclotomic rigidity isomorphisms that
arise from the theory ofalgebraic rational functions[cf. [IUTchIII], Remark 2.3.3,
(vi), (vii); [IUTchIII], Remark 3.11.4; [Alien],§3.4, (iii), as well as the discussion of
Examples 3.3.2, (vi), (vii); 3.8.4, (iv), (v), (vi), below, of the present paper]. Here,
it is of interest to recall that
(MltAdd) the anabelian reconstruction algorithmsof [AbsTopIII], Theorem 1.9, im-
ply that theadditive structureof the function ﬁeld of an algebraic curve
may in fact bereconstructedfrom themultiplicative structureof the func-
tion ﬁeld of algebraic rational functions on the curve, equipped with the

===== PAGE 94 =====

94 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
[multiplicative!] valuation maps and [multiplicative!] evaluation maps at
the closed points of the curve [cf.“Uchida’s Lemma”, i.e., [AbsTopIII],
Proposition 1.3].
That is to say, (MltAdd) means that once one allows oneself to work withalgebraic
rational functions— i.e., as opposed totheta functions— the issue emphasized in
(i) of expressibility purely in terms of multiplicative structures in some
sense ceases to be well-deﬁned/non-vacuous. By contrast, if one restricts oneself,
as is indeed the case in the discussion of (i), to consideringtheta functions —a s
is necessary, in order to apply theessential property (ZrPlOrd)discussed above!
— then (MltAdd) isno longer applicable, so there areno longer any obstructions
to the “well-deﬁnedness/non-vacuousness”of the notion of“expressibility purely in
terms of multiplicative structures”.
Finally, we recall that, in anyvertical lineof log-links in the log-theta-lattice,
· thediscrepancybetweenthe [holomorphic] Frobenius-likecopiesofobjects
on either side of alog-link [cf. (RC-log)], as well as
· the discrepancy between [holomorphic] Frobenius-likecopies of objects
and [holomorphic] ´etale-like copies of objects [cf. (RC-Fr´Et)],
may be understood as the extent to which the diagram of arrows that constitutes
the log-Kummer-correspondence associated to this vertical line oflog-linksfails
to commute.
This failure to commute may beestimated by means of theindeterminacy
(Ind3), i.e., by interpreting this failure to commute as a sort of“upper semi-
commutativity”. This indeterminacy (Ind3) ishighly nontrivialand, in particu-
lar, givesrisetothe inequalitythatappearsintheﬁnalcomputationoflog-volumes
in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory [cf. [IUTchIII], Corollary 3.12]. In this con-
text, it is important to recall that the theory surrounding this indeterminacy (Ind3)
depends, in an essential way, on theabsolute anabelian geometryof [AbsTopIII],§1,
i.e., which allows one to reconstruct a hyperbolic curveX over a number ﬁeld or
mixed characteristic local ﬁeld from theabstract proﬁnite groupdetermined by the
´etale fundamental group π1(X) of the curve. That is to say, in summary, this
absolute anabelian geometryallows one to show that
the discrepancies between the various[holomorphic] Frobenius-likeand
[holomorphic] ´etale-like copies of objects in a vertical line oflog-links [cf.
(RC-log), (RC-Fr´Et)] in the log-theta-lattice are“bounded by”the [rel-
atively mild] indeterminacy (Ind3).
On the other hand, thisabsolute anabelian geometrymost certainly doesnot imply
that these discrepancies are trivial/non-existent, i.e., as asserted in (RC-log), (RC-
Fr´Et) — cf. the discussion of thefalsity of (RC-log), (RC-Fr´Et) in §3.2 and the
present §3.3.
§3.4. RCS-redundant copies in the domain/codomain of theΘ-link
The Θ-link of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory
•
Θ
−→ •

===== PAGE 95 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 95
is deﬁned as a gluing between the (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theater “•”i nt h edomain
of the arrow and the (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theater “•”i nt h ecodomain of the arrow
along F⊩▶×μ-prime-strips “∗” that arise from the Θ-pilot object “Θ-plt”i nt h e
domain and the q-pilot object “q-plt”i nt h ecodomain. Here, it is important to
note that this gluing is obtained by regarding theseF⊩▶×μ-prime-strips “∗”a s
being known only up to isomorphism. This point of view, i.e., of regarding these
F⊩▶×μ-prime-strips “∗” as being known only up to isomorphism, is implemented
formally by taking the gluing to be thefull poly-isomorphism — i.e., the set of
all isomorphisms — between theF⊩▶×μ-prime-strips arising from thedomain and
codomainof the Θ-link. Here, we recall that
· q-plt essentially amounts to the arithmetic line bundle determined by [the
ideal generated by] some 2l-th rootq
v
of theq-parameter at the valuations
v ∈ Vbad, while
· Θ-plt essentially amounts to the collection of arithmetic line bundles de-
termined by [the ideals generated by] the collection{qj2
v
},a sj ranges over
the integers 1,...,l ⋇ def
= l−1
2 [where l is the prime number that appears in
the initial Θ-data under consideration], andv ranges over the valuations
∈ Vbad.
Also, we recall that each (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theater “•” gives rise to an associated
model “Ring” of the ring/scheme theory surrounding the elliptic curve under con-
sideration. In the following discussion, we shall write
· †• for the “•”i nt h edomain of the Θ-link,
· ‡• for the “•”i nt h ecodomainof the Θ-link,
· □ for an arbitrary element of the set consisting of “†”, “‡”, and the
“empty symbol” [i.e., no symbol at all],
· □Θ-plt ∈ □Ring for the Θ-pilot arising from the collection “{□qj2
v
}”t h a t
appears in the model of ring/scheme theory associated to□•,a n d
· □q-plt ∈ □Ring for the q-pilot arising from the “□q
v
” that appears in
the model of ring/scheme theory associated to□•.
Finally, we recall that since, forj ̸=1 ,t h evaluation [at each valuationv ∈ Vbad]
of qj2
v
diﬀersfrom that ofq
v
, the arithmetic degrees of the line bundles constituted
by q-plt and Θ-plt diﬀer.
Thus, at a more formal level, the above description of thegluing that consti-
tutes the Θ-link may be summarized as follows:
†Ring ∋ †Θ-plt ← : ∗ :→ ‡q-plt ∈ ‡Ring
Ring ∋ q-plt ̸=Θ -plt ∈ Ring
[where “← :” and “:→ ” denote the assignments that consitute thegluing discussed
above].

===== PAGE 96 =====

96 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
In this context, we note the followingfundamental observation, which un-
derlies theentire logical structureof inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory [cf. the
discussion of [IUTchIII], Remark 3.12.2, (citw), (fitw); [Alien], §3.11, (iv)]:
(AOΘ1) the following conditionholds:
(
∗ :→ †Θ-plt ∈ †Ring
)
∧
(
∗ :→ ‡q-plt ∈ ‡Ring
)
.
By contrast, if one simplydeletes the distinct labels“†”, “‡” [cf. (RC-Θ)!], then
(AOΘ2) the following conditionholds:
(
∗ :→ Θ-plt ∈ Ring
)
∨
(
∗ :→ q-plt ∈ Ring
)
.
Of course,
(AOΘ3) the essential mathematical content discussed in this condition (AOΘ2)
may beformally described as a condition involving theAND relator“∧”:
(
q-plt ∈{ q-plt,Θ-plt}
)
∧
(
Θ-plt ∈{ q-plt,Θ-plt}
)
.
On the other hand, precisely as aconsequence of the fact [discussed above] that
Ring ∋ q-plt ̸=Θ -plt ∈ Ring,
(AOΘ4) the following condition doesnot hold:
(
∗ :→ Θ-plt ∈ Ring
)
∧
(
∗ :→ q-plt ∈ Ring
)
.
That is to say, the operation ofidentifying†•, ‡•[hence also†Ring, ‡Ring] — e.g.,
on the grounds of“redundancy”[i.e., as asserted in (RC-Θ)!] — bydeleting the
distinct labels “†”, “‡” has the eﬀect of passing from a situation in which
the AND relator“∧” holds [cf. (AOΘ1)]
to a situation in which
the OR relator“∨” holds [cf. (AOΘ2), (AOΘ3)], but
the AND relator“∧”d o e snot hold [cf. (AOΘ4)]!
In particular, relative to thecorrespondences
†•,†Ring ←→ †I; ∗← → γJ; ‡•,‡Ring ←→ ‡I
†Θ-plt ←→ †β; ‡q-plt ←→ ‡α
[cf. the correspondences (StR1) ∼ (StR6) discussed in §3.2; the correspondences
discussed in Example 2.4.5, (ii); the discussion of [Alien],§3.11, (iv)], one obtains
very precisestructural resemblances
(AOΘ1) ←→ (AOL1),
(AOΘ2) ←→ (AOL2),
(AOΘ3) ←→ (AOL3),
(AOΘ4) ←→ (AOL4)

===== PAGE 97 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 97
with the situation discussed in Example 2.4.1, (i), (ii). Thus, in summary,
the falsity of (RC-Θ) may be understood as a consequence of thefalsity
[cf. (AOΘ4)] of the crucialAND relator“∧”i nt h eabsence of distinct
labels, in stark contrast to thetruth [cf. (AOΘ1)] of the crucialAND
relator “∧” as an essentiallytautological consequenceof the use of the
distinct labels “†”, “‡”.
Inthecontextofthe central roleplayedinthelogicalstructureofinter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory by thevalidity of (AOΘ1), it is important to note [cf. the
property discussed in (AOΘ4)!] that
(NoRng) there doesnot exist an isomorphism ofring structures†Ring
∼
→ ‡Ring
that induces, on value groups of corresponding local rings, the desired
assignment {†qj2
v
} ↦→ ‡q
v
[i.e., that appears in the Θ-link].
On the other hand, if, instead of considering thefull ring structuresof†Ring, ‡Ring,
one considers [cf. the discussion of [Rpt2018],§6]
· certain suitable subquotients — i.e., in the notation of [Alien], §3.3,
(vii), (aq), (aΘ), “O×
k ” — of theunderlying multiplicative monoids
of corresponding local ﬁelds, as well as
· the absolute Galois groups — i.e., in the notation of [Alien],§3.3, (vii),
(aq), (aΘ), “Gk” — associated to corresponding local rings, regarded as
abstract topological groups [that is to say,not as Galois groups, or
equivalently/alternatively, as groups of ﬁeld automorphisms! — cf. the
discussion of §3.8 below],
then one obtains structures — i.e., the structures that constitute theF⊩▶×μ-prime-
strips that appear in the Θ-link — that aresimultaneously associated[as “un-
derlying structures”] toboth †Ring and ‡Ring via isomorphisms [i.e., of certain
suitable multiplicative monoidsequipped with actions by certain suitableabstract
topological groups] that restrict, on the subquotient monoids that correspond to the
respective value groups, to thedesired assignment {†qj2
v
} ↦→ ‡q
v
.I ti st h i scrucial
simultaneity that yields, as a tautological consequence, thevalidity of theAND
relator “∧” in (AOΘ1).
Working, as in the discussion above, with multiplicative monoids equipped
with actions byabstract topological groups, necessarily gives rise to certaininde-
terminacies, called (Ind1), (Ind2), that play an important role in inter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory. Certain aspects of these indeterminacies (Ind1), (Ind2) will be
discussed in more detail in§3.5 below. In this context, we recall that one central
assertion of the RCS [cf. the discussion of Example 3.2.2; the discussion of (SSInd),
(SSId) in [Rpt2018],§7, §10] is to the eﬀect that
(NeuRng) these indeterminacies (Ind1), (Ind2) may beeliminated, without aﬀecting
the essential logical structure of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, by tak-
ing themultiplicative monoidsand abstract topological groupsthat appear
in the F⊩▶×μ-prime-strips of the above discussion to be equipped with
rigidiﬁcations by regarding them as arising from someﬁxed “neutral”
ring structure ⊡Ring.

===== PAGE 98 =====

98 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
On the other hand, as discussed in (NoRng) above, there doesnot exist any ring
structurethatis compatible[i.e., inthesensediscussedin(NoRng)], withthedesired
assignment {†qj2
v
} ↦→ ‡q
v
. That is to say, in summary,
(NeuORInd) working with such aﬁxed “neutral” ring structure⊡Ring as in (NeuRng)
means either that
(NeuORInd1) there is no relationshipbetween “∗”a n d⊡Ring, or that
(NeuORInd2) the relationship between “∗”a n d⊡Ring is always necessarily
subject to anindeterminacy [cf. (AOΘ2), (AOΘ3)!]
(
∗ :→ ⊡Θ-plt ∈ ⊡Ring
)
∨
(
∗ :→ ⊡q-plt ∈ ⊡Ring
)
[cf. the situation discussed in Example 3.2.2; the situation discussed in
[Rpt2018], §10, (SSId)].
Here, we observe that whichever of these “options”/“indeterminacies” that appear
in (NeuORInd) [i.e., (NeuORInd1), (NeuORInd2)] one chooses to adopt, one is
forced to contend with an indeterminacy that is, in some sense,much more drastic
than the relatively mild indeterminacies (Ind1), (Ind2) whoseelimination formed
the original motivationfor the introduction of⊡Ring!
Finally, we observe that this much more drastic indeterminacy(NeuORInd)
means [cf. the discussion of Example 2.4.4!] that throughout any argument, one
must always take the position that theonly possible relationshipbetween “∗”a n d
⊡Θ-plt, ⊡q-plt is one in which
(PltRel) “∗” maps either to⊡Θ-plt or — i.e., “∨”! — to⊡q-plt,b u tnot both!
Since ‡Ring may be thought of as a ring structure in which “∗”tautologically maps
to ‡Θ-plt, while †Ring may be thought of as a ring structure in which “∗”tauto-
logically maps to‡q-plt, one may rephrase the aboveobservation as the observation
that one must always take the position that theonly possible relationshipbetween
⊡Ring, on the one hand, and‡Ring, †Ring, on the other, is one in which
(RngRel) the ring structure⊡Ring is identiﬁed either with the ring structure‡Ring
or — i.e., “∨”! — with the ring structure†Ring,b u tnot both!
At this point, let us recall [cf., e.g., the discussion of§3.5, §3.11, below; [Rpt2018],
§9, (GIUT), (ΘCR)] that
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory requires, in an essential way, the use of
the log-links, hence, in particular, [in order to deﬁne thepower seriesof
the variousp-adic logarithm functions that constitute theselog-links!] the
ring structures†Ring, ‡Ring on both sides— i.e., “∧”! — of the Θ-link
[cf. the discussion surrounding (InfH) of the twovertical lines of log-links in the
“inﬁnite H”on either side of the Θ-link]. In particular, we conclude formally that
it is impossible to implement the arguments of inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory once this sort ofmuch more drastic indeterminacy(NeuORInd)
has been imposed.

===== PAGE 99 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 99
§3.5. Gluings, indeterminacies, and pilot discrepancy
As discussed in§3.4, the Θ-link involves agluing
{†qj2
v
} ↦→ ‡q
v
that identiﬁes ‡q
v
[i.e., 2l-th roots of theq-parameters at primes of multiplicative
reduction of the [copy belonging to‡Ring of the] elliptic curve under consideration]
with elements, i.e., the†qj2
v
’ s ,w h i c h ,w h e nj ̸=1 ,h a v ediﬀerent valuationsfrom
the valuation of‡q
v
.
On the other hand, in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, by applying themul-
tiradial representationof [IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11, which involves variousin-
determinacies (Ind1), (Ind2), (Ind3), and then forming [cf. [IUTchIII], Corollary
3.12, and its proof] theholomorphic hull of the union of possible images of the
Θ-pilot in this multiradial representation,
(ΘGl) one may treat both sides of the Θ-link gluing of the above display
as belonging to asingle ring theorywithout disturbing [cf. thecrucial
AND relator “∧”property discussed in§3.4!] the gluing.
Alternative ways to understand theessential mathematical contentof (ΘGl) include
the following:
(NonInf) One may think of (ΘGl) as a statement concerning themutually non-
interference or simultaneous executatibilityof theKummer theo-
riessurroundingthe q-pilotandΘ-pilotrelativetothe gluingofabstract
F⊩▶×μ-prime-strips constituted by the Θ-link, i.e., when the Kummer
theory surrounding theq-pilot is heldﬁxed, and one allows the Kummer
theory surrounding the Θ-pilot to be subject to variousindeterminacies.
(Cohab) One may think of (ΘGl) as a statement concerning the“cohabitation”,
or “coexistence”,o ft h eq-pilot and Θ-pilot —r e l a t i v et ot h egluing
of abstract F⊩▶×μ-prime-strips constituted by the Θ-link — within the
common containerobtained by applying the multiradial representation
oftheΘ-pilot, formingthe holomorphic hull[relativetotheholomorphic
structure [i.e., (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theater] that gave rise to theq-pilot under
consideration], and ﬁnally takinglog-volumes.
In this context, it is important to recall that thissort of phenomenon— i.e.,
of computations of global degrees/heights of elliptic curves in sit-
uations where a certain“confusion”, up to suitableindeterminacies,
is allowed between q-parameters of the elliptic curves and certainlarge
positive powersof theseq-parameters [i.e., as in (ΘGl)]
— may be seen in variousclassical examplessuch as
· the proof by Faltings of theinvariance of heights of abelian varieties
under isogeny [cf. the discussion of [Alien], §2.3, §2.4, as well as the
discussion of Example 3.2.1 in the present paper],

===== PAGE 100 =====

100 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
· the classical proof in characteristic zero of thegeometric versionof the
Szpiro inequalityvia theKodaira-Spencer morphism, phrased in terms of
the theory ofcrystals [cf. the discussion of [Alien],§3.1, (v)], and
· Bogomolov’s proofover the complex numbers of thegeometric version
of theSzpiro inequality[cf. the discussion of [Alien],§3.10, (vi)]
— cf. also the discussion of [Rpt2018],§16. Moreover, in the case ofcrystals,w e
observe that, relative to the notation introduced in Example 2.4.5, (v), (vi), we
have correspondencesas follows:
(CrAND) Thelogical AND “∧”that appears in themultiradial representationofthe
Θ-pilot inIUT (= AND-IUT)may be understood as being analogous to
the fact thatcrystals, i.e., “ ∧-crystals”, may be thought of as objects
[on inﬁnitesimal neighborhoods of the diagonal inside products of two
copies of the scheme under consideration] that may besimultaneously
interpreted, up to isomorphism, as pull-backs via one projection morphism
and [cf. “ ∧”!] as pull-backs via the other projection morphism [cf. the
discussion of (∧(˙∨)-Chn1) in §3.10 below; the discussion of [Alien],§3.11,
(iv), (2and), concerning the interpretation of the discussion ofcrystals in
[Alien], §3.1, (v), (3KS), in terms of the logical relator “∧”].
(CrOR) Thus, from the point of view of the analogy discussed in (CrAND), the
logical OR “∨”that appears throughoutOR-IUT may be understood as
corresponding to working with“ ∨-crystals”[i.e., as opposed tocrystals
(= ∧-crystals)], that is to say, with objects [on inﬁnitesimal neighbor-
hoods of the diagonal inside products of two copies of the scheme under
consideration] that may be interpreted, up to isomorphism, as pull-backs
via one projection morphismor [cf. “∨”!] as pull-backs via the other pro-
jection morphism. Here, we observe that this deﬁning “∨” condition of an
∨-crystal isessentially vacuoussince one may obtain∨-crystals from ar-
bitrary objects on the scheme under consideration simply by pulling back
such an object to the inﬁnitesimal neighborhood of the diagonal under
consideration via one of the two projection morphisms.
(CrRCS) In a similar vein, from the point of view of the analogies discussed in
(CrAND) and (CrOR),RCS-IUT may be understood as corresponding
to the modiﬁed version of the usual theory of crystals obtained byre-
placing the inﬁnitesimal neighborhoods of the diagonalinside products
of two copies of the scheme under consideration [i.e., that appear in the
usual theory of crystals!] by the diagonal itself. Such a replacement
clearly renders the usual theory of crystalstrivial/meaningless,i na
fashion that is essentially verysimilar to the triviality of ∨-crystals dis-
cussed in (CrOR). Finally, we observe that thissimilarity between the
modiﬁed versions of the usual theory of crystals discussed in (CrOR) and
the present (CrRCS) is entirely analogous to the equivalence OR-IUT
⇐⇒ RCS-IUT observed in Example 2.4.5, (v), (XOR/RCS).
Unfortunately, however, the situation summarized above in (ΘGl) has resulted
in certain frequently voicedmisunderstandings by some mathematicians. One
such frequently voiced misunderstandingis to the eﬀect that

===== PAGE 101 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 101
(CnfInd1+2) the situation summarized in (ΘGl) may be explained as a consequence of
a “confusion”between q-parameters and large positive powers of these
q-parameters that results from the indeterminacies (Ind1), (Ind2).
In fact, however, as discussed in Example 3.5.1, (iii), below,
at least in the case ofq-parameters of suﬃciently small valuation [i.e.,
suﬃciently large positiveorder, in the sense ofloc. cit.], such a “con-
fusion”[i.e., between q-parameters and large positive powers of these
q-parameters] can never occur as a consequence of (Ind1), (Ind2), i.e.,
both of which amount toautomorphisms of the [underlying topological
module of the]log-shells involved
[cf. also the discussion of (ΘInd) in [Rpt2018],§11]. In this context, we note that
this misunderstanding (CnfInd1+2) appears to be caused in many cases, at least
in part, by a moregeneral misunderstanding concerning the operation ofpassage
to underlying structures[cf. Example 3.5.2 below]. A more detailed discussion of
the operation ofpassage to underlying structuresmay be found in§3.9 below.
As discussed in [Rpt2018],§11, the “confusion” summarized in (ΘGl) occurs
in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory as a consequence not only of thelocal in-
determinacies (Ind1), (Ind2), (Ind3), but also of the constraints imposed by the
global realiﬁed Frobenioid portions of the F⊩▶×μ-prime-strips that appear in
the Θ-link. In this context, it is ofparticular importanceto observe that
(CnfInd3) the indeterminacy (Ind3), which constrains one to restrict one’s atten-
tion to upper bounds [i.e., but not lower bounds!] on the log-volume
that is the subject of the computation of [IUTchIII], Corollary 3.12, al-
ready by itself — i.e.,without considering (Ind1), (Ind2), or global reali-
ﬁed Frobenioids! [cf. the discussion of (Ind3>1+2) in §3.11 below] — is
suﬃcient to accountfor the possibility of a“confusion”of the sort
summarized in (ΘGl) [i.e., betweenq-parameters and large positive powers
of theseq-parameters].
Indeed, the indeterminacy (Ind3) isdeﬁned in precisely such a way as toidentify
the ideals generated byarbitrary positive powersof theq-parameters.
Example 3.5.1: Bounded nature of log-shell automorphism indetermina-
cies. Write Zp for the ring ofp-adic integers, for some prime numberp; Qp for
the ﬁeld of fractions ofZp.
(i) LetM be a ﬁnitely generated freeZp-module, which, in the following dis-
cussion, we shall think of as being embedded inMQp
def
= M ⊗Zp Qp;
α: M
∼
→ M
an automorphism of theZp-module M.F o rn ∈ Z,w r i t e
U(M,n)
def
= {x ∈ MQp | x ∈ pn ·M, x ̸∈ pn+1 ·M }⊆ MQp.
Then observe thatαinduces abijection
U(M,n)
∼
→U (M,n)

===== PAGE 102 =====

102 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
for everyn ∈ Z.
(ii) In the notation of (i), suppose, for simplicity, thatp is odd.L e tk be a ﬁnite
ﬁeld extension ofQp.W r i t eOk ⊆ k for the ring of integers ofk; O×
k ⊆O k for the
group of units ofOk; mk ⊆O k for the maximal ideal ofk; Ik ⊆ k for thelog-shell
associated to k [cf., e.g., the discussion of [IUTchIII], Remark 1.2.2, (i)], i.e., the
result of multiplying byp−1 the image logp(O×
k )o f O×
k by the p-adic logarithm
logp(−). Thus,
Ok ⊆I k ⊆ p−c ·Ok
for some nonnegative integer ofc that depends only on the isomorphism class of
the ﬁeldk [cf. [IUTchIV], Proposition 1.2, (i)]. In particular, there exists a positive
integer s that depends only on the isomorphism class of the ﬁeldk such that for
any automorphism
φ: Ik
∼
→I k
of theZp-module Ik and anyn ∈ Z, it holds that
φ(U(Ok,n)) ⊆
s⋃
i=−s
U(Ok,n +i)
[where i ranges over the integers between−s and s].
(iii) In the situation of (ii), we deﬁne theorderof a nonzero elementx ∈ k to be
the uniquen ∈ Z such thatx ∈ mn
k, x ̸∈ mn+1
k . One thus concludes from the ﬁnal
portion of the discussion of (ii) that there exists a positive integert that depends
only on the isomorphism class of the ﬁeldk such that for anyautomorphism
φ: Ik
∼
→I k
of theZp-module Ik and any nonzero elementq ∈O k [i.e., such as theq-parameter
of a Tate curve overk!], the absolute value of thediﬀerencebetween theorders of
q and φ(q)i s ≤ t, i.e., in words,
automorphisms of theZp-module Ik only give rise tobounded discrep-
ancies in the orders of nonzero elements ofOk.
Example 3.5.2: Examples of gluings. Distinct auxiliary structureson some
common [i.e., “∧”!]underlying structuremay be thought of asgluings of the dis-
tinct auxiliary structures along the common underlying structure. Here, we observe
that, in general,distinct auxiliary structureson acommon underlying structureare
not necessarily mapped to one another by someautomorphism of the common un-
derlying structure. Concrete examples of these generalities may be found in quite
substantial abundance throughout arithmetic geometry and include, in particular,
the examples (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v) given below, as well as the elementary Examples
2.3.2, 2.4.1, 2.4.2, 2.4.3, 2.4.7, 2.4.8, 3.3.1 discussed in§2.3, §2.4, §3 . 3[ c f .a l s ot h e
discussion of [Rpt2018],§11]. In passing, we observe that
these examples may also be understood as interesting examples of the
sort ofgluing/logical AND “∧” relationthat appears in the Θ-/log-
linksofinter-universalTeichm¨ullertheory, i.e., examplesofsituationsthat

===== PAGE 103 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 103
are qualitatively similarto the Θ-/log-links of inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory in the sense that they involvedistinct auxiliary structuresthat are
glued togetheralong somecommon auxiliary structure
[cf. the discussion of (StR1)∼ (StR6) in §3.2; the discussion of§3.4; the portion of
the present §3.5 preceding Example 3.5.1].
(i) The group structures of theﬁnite abelian groupsZ/2Z×Z/2Z and Z/4Z
are not mapped to one another by anyisomorphism of sets, despite the fact that
the underlying sets of these two groups are indeed isomorphic to one another. This
example is also of interest in light of the discussion oftruncated Witt vectors
in Example 2.4.6, (iii).
(ii) Thescheme structuresof non-isomorphic algebraic curvesover a com-
mon algebraically closed ﬁeld arenot mapped to one another by anyisomorphism
of topological spaces, despite the fact that the underlying topological spaces of al-
gebraic curves over a common algebraically closed ﬁeld are indeed isomorphic to
one another.
(iii)The holomorphic structuresofnon-isomorphic compact Riemann sur-
faces R1, R2 with homeomorphic underlying topological spaces arenot mapped to
one another by anyhomeomorphism, i.e., by anyisomorphism of topological spaces,
despite the fact that the underlying topological spaces of such Riemann surfaces
R1, R2 are indeed isomorphic to one another. [This example is in factessentially
similar to the situation discussed in Example 3.3.1, except that in the situation of
Example 3.3.1, the “two” Riemann surfacesinvolved are both isomorphic to the
complex plane, hence, in particular,isomorphic to one another.] In this context, it
is of interest to observe that
(iii-a) if one deﬁnes the genus of such a compact Riemann surfaceRi,f o r
i ∈{ 1,2}, as the complex dimension of the space ofglobal holomorphic
diﬀerentialson the Riemann surface, then it isby no means clearthat
R1 and R2 have the same genus, i.e., since this deﬁnition of the genus
depends, in an essential way, on theholomorphic structureof the Rie-
mann surface.
On the other hand, once one veriﬁes that
(iii-b) this “holomorphic deﬁnition” of the genus coincides with the genus de-
ﬁned in terms of the singular homology group of theunderlying topo-
logical space, it follows immediately thatR1 and R2 do indeed have the
same genus.
This contrast between the “holomorphic” and “topological” deﬁnitions of the genus
is of interest in the context of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory since it illustrates
(iii-c) the very substantive signiﬁcanceof formulating the deﬁnitions of objects
or constructions [i.e., in the present discussion, the “genus”] in terms of
structures that arecoric for the“gluing/link”[i.e., in the present dis-
cussion, a comparison of distinct holomorphic structures on homeomor-
phic topological spaces] under consideration, that is to say, in terms of
structures that arecommonly sharedin aninvariantfashion by, hence
satisfy alogical AND “∧” relationrelative to, the two objects [i.e., in

===== PAGE 104 =====

104 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
the present discussion,R1 and R2] that are related to one another by the
link under consideration.
We refer to the discussion of§3.8 below for a more detailed treatment of the im-
portance of coric structures in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory.
(iv) The ﬁeld structures of non-isomorphic mixed-characteristic local
ﬁelds [which, bylocal class ﬁeld theory, may be regarded as [the formal union with
“{0}” of] some suitable subquotient of their respective absolute Galois groups] are
not, in general, mapped to one another by anyisomorphism of proﬁnite groups
between the respective absolute Galois groups [cf., e.g., [Ymgt],§2, Theorem, for
an example of this phenomenon].
(v) In the notation of Example 3.5.1, (i), letX be a proper smooth curve of
genus ≥ 2o v e rFp
def
= Zp/pZp.T h u s ,X may be thought of as an“underlying
structure”associated to anylifting ofX to Zp, i.e., any ﬂatZp-scheme Y equipped
an isomorphism ofFp-schemesY ×Zp Fp
∼
→ X. Then observe thatnon-isomorphic
liftingsofX toZp arenot, ingeneral, mappedtooneanotherbyany automorphism
of theFp-scheme X. [Indeed, this is particularly easy to see if one choosesX such
that X does not admit any nontrivial automorphisms.] In passing, we note that
this example may be regarded as a sort ofp-adic analogueof the example of (iii).
Finally, we make the importantobservation that crystals on X [relative toZp]a r e
objects that arecoric/common to arbitrary liftingsof X to Zp.T h i sobservation
is of particular importance in light of thestrong structural resemblancesbetween
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory and thetheory of crystals[cf. [Alien], §3.1, (v);
the discussion of (CrAND) in the present§3.5; the discussion of§3.10 below].
Example 3.5.3: Gluings from the point of view of tilts of perfectoid ﬁelds.
Certain aspects of
(UGΘ) theunit group portionsof theF⊩▶×μ-prime-strips that appear in the
Θ-link of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory
bear a certain resemblance to
(TltPh) certain phenomena that occur in the theory oftilts of perfectoid ﬁelds
[cf., e.g., [Bns],§5, for an exposition of basic facts surrounding this theory].
InthepresentExample3.5.3, wediscuss similaritiesanddiﬀerencesbetween(UGΘ)
and (TltPh).
(i) Fix a prime numberp.L e tk be a perfectoid ﬁeld of characteristic zero
[cf. [Bns], Deﬁnition 5.1.1], k an algebraic closure ofk.W r i t eGk
def
= Gal(k/k);
Ck for the completion ofk, which is itself a perfectoid ﬁeld [cf. [Bns], Example
5.1.2, (2)]; “O(−)” for the ring of integers of a ﬁeld equipped with an absolute
value; Zp(1)
def
= Hom(Qp/Zp, O×
k ); Qp(1)
def
= Zp(1) ⊗Zp Qp. Then we recall from
[Bns], §5.2.2; [Bns], Proposition 5.2.3 [cf. also [Bns], Example 5.1.2, (1)], that
the tilt k♭ of k is a perfectoid ﬁeld of characteristic p whose ring of integers Ok♭
admits natural multiplicative bijections[i.e., bijections that are compatible with the
respective multiplicative structures]
Ok♭
∼
→ lim←− Ok
∼
→ lim←− Ok/p ·Ok

===== PAGE 105 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 105
— where the inverse systems implicit in the inverse limit are indexed byN with
transition morphisms given by thep-th power map[cf. also the discussion of (v)
below], and the second “
∼
→ ” is given by reduction modulop.W r i t ek
♭
for the direct
limit of the ﬁnite extensions ofk♭ determined by the tilts of the ﬁnite subextensions
of the extension k/k [cf. [Bns], Theorem 5.4.4]. In particular, we conclude, by
replacing “O”b y“O×” and then considering the quotients “O×μ” [i.e., the units
modulotorsion]and“ O×μ′
”[i.e., theunitsmoduloprime-to-ptorsion], thatwehave
natural isomorphisms and a natural exact sequenceof [multiplicative] topological
modules
O×
k♭
∼
→ lim←− O×
k ; O×μ
C♭
k
= O×μ′
C♭
k
∼
→O ×˜μ
Ck
def
= lim←− O×μ′
Ck
;
1 −→ Qp(1) −→ O ×˜μ
Ck
−→ O ×μ
Ck
−→ 1,
all of which are compatible with the respective natural actions ofGk♭
def
= Gal(k
♭
/k♭)
and Gk,r e l a t i v et ot h enatural isomorphism Gk♭
∼
→ Gk induced by the tilt con-
struction [cf. [Bns], Theorem 5.4.4]. Finally, in this context, we observe that we
have anexact sequence of [multiplicative] topologicalGk-modules
1 −→ Qp(1) −→ O ×˜μ
k −→ O ×μ
k −→ 1,
where we write O×˜μ
k
def
= lim←− O×μ′
k . Thus, we have a natural Gk-equivariant
injection O×˜μ
k ↪→O ×˜μ
Ck
that hasdense image, but isnot surjective.
(ii) The discussion of (i) may be summarized as follows. In the notation of (i),
we obtain anatural isomorphism of [multiplicative] topological modulesequipped
with continuous actions bytopological groups
Gk♭
∼
→ Gk
↷↷
O×μ
C♭
k
∼
→O ×˜μ
Ck
.
In particular, if†k and ‡k are perfectoid ﬁelds of characteristic zero, and†k♭ ∼
→ ‡k♭
is an isomorphism of topological ﬁelds, then, by composing the diagrams as above in
the case of†k and ‡k,w eo b t a i nanatural isomorphism of [multiplicative] topological
modules equipped with continuous actions bytopological groups
G† k
∼
→ G‡ k
↷↷
O×˜μ
C† k
∼
→O ×˜μ
C‡ k
.
It is well-known that there are many examples of such†k, ‡k, such as suitable pairs
of the following perfectoid ﬁelds [cf. [Bns], Example 4.1.5, (1), (2); [Bns], Theorem
5.1.4] associated to a ﬁnite unramiﬁed extensionE of Qp:

===== PAGE 106 =====

106 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(TltEx1) the p-adic completion ofE(ζp∞ ), i.e., the ﬁeld extension ofE obtained
by adjoining allp-power roots of unity;
(TltEx2) the p-adic completion ofE(π
1
p∞
), i.e., the ﬁeld extension ofE obtained
by adjoining toE as y s t e mo fp-power roots of a uniformizerπof E.
Finally, we observe that in the situation wherek is thep-adic completion of some
[necessarily inﬁnite!] subextension of some algebraic closureQp of Qp, we obtain
compatible natural inclusionsGk ↪→ GQp
def
= Gal(Qp/Qp), O×˜μ
Qp
↪→O ×˜μ
Ck
. Here, the
image of the ﬁrst inclusionGk ↪→ GQp
def
= Gal(Qp/Qp)i sclosed, butnot open[i.e.,
is necessarily of inﬁnite index], while the second inclusionO×˜μ
Qp
↪→O ×˜μ
Ck
has dense
image, but isnot surjective.
(iii) Next, letQp be an algebraic closure ofQp; K ⊆ K1 ⊆ ... ⊆ Ki ⊆ Ki+1 ⊆
... ⊆ Qp a sequence, indexed by the positive integers, of ﬁnite extensions ofQp
contained inQp such that
(iii-a) there exists a positive integeri0 such that for alli ≥ i0, Ki+1 is atotally
ramiﬁed extension ofKi of degreep;
(iii-b) K∞
def
= ∪i≥1 Ki is deeply ramiﬁed[cf. [Bns], Deﬁnition 4.1.4].
For each positive integeri,w r i t eGKi
def
= Gal(Qp/Ki); GK∞
def
= Gal(Qp/K∞); Ki,
K∞, Fp for the respective residue ﬁelds ofKi, K∞, Qp. One veriﬁes immediately
that if L ⊆ Qp is any ﬁnite extension ofQp, then the sequence of composite ex-
tensions L ⊆ L · K1 ⊆ ... ⊆ L · Ki ⊆ L · Ki+1 ⊆ ... ⊆ Qp satisﬁes the same
conditions as the{Ki}i≥1. Observe that bylocal class ﬁeld theory,w eh a v enatural
isomorphisms
Gab
K∞
∼
→ lim←−i
Gab
Ki
∼
→ lim←−i
(K×
i )∧
— where the superscript “ab” denotes the topological abelianization of a topologi-
cal group; “∧” denotes the proﬁnite completion; the indices “i” in the inverse limits
range over the positive integers; the transition morphisms in the ﬁrst inverse limit
are the natural morphisms induced by thenatural inclusions GKi+1 ↪→ GKi;t h e
transition morphisms in the second inverse limit are the morphisms induced by the
norms of the extensionsKi+1/Ki. Thus, it follows immediately from our assump-
tion (iii-a) on the{Ki}i≥1, together withlocal class ﬁeld theory, that the residue
ﬁeld K∞ of K∞ is ﬁnite, and that we havenatural isomorphisms
K×
∞
∼
→ μp′(Gab
K∞ ); F
×
p
∼
→ lim−→H
μp′(Hab)
— where the superscript “×” denotes the group of nonzero elements of a ﬁeld;
“μp′(−)” denotes the subgroup of prime-to-p torsion elements of an abelian group;
the “H” in the direct limit ranges over the open subgroups ofGK∞ .I np a r t i c u l a r ,
the direct limit of the above display yields afunctorial group-theoretic algorithm,
whose input data is the topological groupGK∞ , and whose functoriality is with
respect to isomorphisms of topological groups, forreconstructing theGK∞ -module
F
×
p . Since the kernel of the action ofGK∞ on F
×
p may be identiﬁed with theinertia
subgroupIK∞ ⊆ GK∞ , we thus obtain

===== PAGE 107 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 107
(RcnCh) a functorial group-theoretic algorithm in the topological group GK∞
for reconstructing the set of totally ramiﬁed characters with open image
χ: GK∞ → Z×
p .
Next, observe that [cf. [Bns], Theorem 5.1.4; our assumption (iii-b) on the{Ki}i≥1]
we make take theperfectoid ﬁeld k of (i) to be thep-adic completionof K∞ and
identify GK∞ with Gk [cf. [Bns], Theorem 1.1.8]. In particular, we recall [cf.,
e.g., [Bns], Corollary 16.1.3; [Bns], Example 16.1.4] that thep-adic logarithmdeter-
mines aGk-equivariant isomorphism of topological modulesO×μ
Ck
∼
→ Ck.N o wl e tu s
consider theperfectoid ﬁelds†k, ‡k of (TltEx1), (TltEx2) [i.e., associated to some
ﬁnite unramiﬁed extension E of Qp — cf. (ii)], which, as is easily veriﬁed, may
be constructed in the fashion of the perfectoid ﬁeld “k” of the present discussion.
Write †χcyc : G† k → Z×
p , ‡χcyc : G‡ k → Z×
p for the respectivep-adic cyclotomic
charactersof †k, ‡k.T h u s ,†χcyc is, by deﬁnition [cf. (TltEx1)],trivial, while‡χcyc,
by deﬁnition [cf. (TltEx2)], hasopen image. Moreover, themanifestly intrinsically
distinct natureof †χcyc, ‡χcyc implies that
(DstCh) anyisomorphism O×˜μ
C† k
∼
→O ×˜μ
C‡ k
arisingfromadiagramofisomorphismsas
in thesecond displayof (ii)fails to inducean isomorphism of the respective
exact sequences
1 −→ Qp(1) −→ O ×˜μ
C† k
−→ O ×μ
C† k
−→ 1,
1 −→ Qp(1) −→ O ×˜μ
C‡ k
−→ O ×μ
C‡ k
−→ 1,
of (i) associated to†k, ‡k; in particular, by applying thep-adic logarithm
O×μ
C† k
∼
→ C† k, we conclude that thetotally ramiﬁed character with open
image (†χcyc ̸=) ψ
def
= ‡χcyc|G† k
: G† k → Z×
p [cf. (RcnCh)] satisﬁes the
remarkable nonvanishing property
H0(G† k,C† k(ψ−1)) ̸=0
— i.e., in sharp contrast to the vanishing of the corresponding cohomology
module in the well-known classical situation where “†k” is replaced by a
ﬁnite extension of Qp [cf., e.g., [Bns], Theorem 4.3.2, (iii)].
Put another way, relative to a diagram of isomorphisms as in thesecond displayof
(ii),
(DstHT) the perfectoid ﬁelds †k, ‡k do not share acommmon p-adic cyclotomic
character[i.e., in sharp contrast to the situation for ﬁnite extensions ofQp
— cf. [AbsAnab], Proposition 1.2.1, (vi)] orcommon propertiesinvolving
vanishing of cohomology groups— all of which constitute fundamental
aspects of p-adic Hodge theory;t h a ti st os a y ,i naw o r d ,t h ep e r f e c t o i d
ﬁelds †k, ‡k do not share a“common p-adic Hodge theory”.
In particular, any aspects of anabelian geometry that involve conventional tech-
niques ofp-adic Hodge theory cannot be applied to isomorphisms as in thesecond
display of (ii).

===== PAGE 108 =====

108 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(iv) Next, we observe, in the context of the discussion of the ﬁnal portion of
(ii), that
(TltSim) the diagrams in the two displays of (ii) aresubstantially reminiscentof
the isomorphisms between theunit group portions[cf., e.g., the discussion
of “(aΘ)” and “(aq)” in [Alien],§3.3, (vii)] of theF⊩▶×μ-prime-strips that
appear in the Θ-link of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory.
Of course, as observed in (ii) and (iii), there areimmediately evident diﬀerences,
such as the fact that
(TltDf1) unlike the situation with the unit group portion of the Θ-link of inter-
universal Teichm¨uller theory, the image of the inclusionGk ↪→ GQp
def
=
Gal(Qp/Qp)i s closed, but not open, while the inclusion O×˜μ
Qp
↪→O ×˜μ
Ck
involves “O×˜μ” instead of “O×μ” [cf. the discussion of (DstCh), (DstHT)
in the ﬁnal portion of (iii)!] and hasdense image, but isnot surjective.
Another fundamental diﬀerence, in the case of the ﬁrst display of (ii), lies in the
diﬀerence between notions ofglobality:
(TltDf2) the fact that thetilt k♭ is ofpositive characteristicmeans that,
· unlike the case withk, which, in the context of inter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory [cf. the discussion of the ﬁnal portion of (ii)],
is regarded as some sort oflocalizationof [i.e., more precisely, the
p-adic completion of an inﬁnite extension of] anumber ﬁeld,
· theonlynaturalwaytoregard k♭ assomesortoflocalizationofa
global ﬁeldis to regard it as alocalizationof [i.e., more precisely,
a completion of an inﬁnite extension of] a one-dimensional
function ﬁeld over a base ﬁeld ofpositive characteristic.
That is to say, unlike the case with inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory,
the sort of “link” constituted by the ﬁrst display of (ii) is necessarily a
“link” between local data arising fromtwo fundamentally diﬀerent notions
of globality.
(v) Before proceeding further, it is interesting to note, in the context of the
general themes of “redundant copies”and gluings [cf. the discussion of §2.3,
§2.4, §3.1; Example 3.5.2; the present Example 3.5.3], that each of thetransition
morphisms “Ok →O k” in the inverse limit
Ok♭ = lim←− Ok
used to deﬁne the tilt [cf. (i)] may be regarded as a “gluing”between a certain
quotient of thecopy of Ok in thedomain and a certain subset of thecopy of Ok in
the codomain. Note, moreover, that although
(RCTlt1) these domain and codomain copies ofOk admit aring isomorphism,
i.e., if one does not require any sort ofcompatibility of the isomorphism,
in the evident sense, with the transition morphism [i.e., raising to thep-th
power],
(RCTlt2) these domain and codomain copies ofOk do not, in general, admit an

===== PAGE 109 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 109
isomorphism [as rings or indeed even as sets!] that is compatible,i n
the evident sense, with the transition morphism [i.e., raising to thep-th
power].
Moreover, if one takes the“RCS point of view”of asserting that the domain
and codomain copies ofOk are “redundant”, hence may beidentiﬁed, then the
resulting inverse limit is simply the set
{x ∈O k | xp = x}
— i.e., a set that ismanifestly completely diﬀerentfrom the set obtained by taking
the inverse limit as in the deﬁnition of the tilt in (i), i.e., where onedistinguishes
the implicit distinct labels/indicesof copies ofOk that appear in the inverse system.
(vi) In the context of thegeneral themesof “redundant copies”and gluings
[cf. the discussion of§2.3, §2.4, §3.1; Example 3.5.2; the present Example 3.5.3], we
observe that (RCTlt1), (RCTlt2) have the following respectiveprecise analogues
in the theory ofholomorphic structureson Riemann surfaces[cf. the discussion of
Examples 3.3.1; 3.5.2, (iii)]:
(RCRS1) whereas the domain and codomain copies ofC in the fundamental Te-
ichm¨uller deformation Λ of Example 3.3.1 admit aholomorphic iso-
morphism, i.e., if one does not require any sort ofcompatibility of the
isomorphism, in the evident sense, with the homeomorphism Λ,
(RCRS2) these domain and codomain copies ofC do not admit aholomorphic
isomorphism that is compatible, in the evident sense, with the homeo-
morphism Λ.
By contrast, the situation considered in Example 3.5.2, (iii), gives an example of
s i t u a t i o ni nw h i c h
(RCRS3) one hasdistinct holomorphic structureson the same underlying compact
topological surface that give rise to Riemann surfacesR1, R2 that donot
admit a holomorphic isomorphism, i.e., regardless of whether or not
one imposes a compatibility condition[cf. (RCRS1), (RCRS2)] with some
homeomorphism between the underlying topological surfaces ofR1, R2.
Note, moreover, that (RCRS1), (RCRS2) [or, alternatively, (RCTlt1), (RCTlt2)]
admit the following respectiveprecise analoguesin the theory surrounding the Θ-
link in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory:
(RCΘ1) whereas the (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theaters in the domain and codomain of
the Θ-link in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory areisomorphic, i.e., if
one does not require any sort ofcompatibility of the isomorphism, in the
evident sense, with the Θ-link,
(RCΘ2) as observed in Example 3.2.2, (i-a), (iv) [cf. also the discussion of Exam-
ple 2.4.8, (ii)] — essentially as a consequence of thedeﬁnition of a ring,
i.e., the elementary observation that theN-th power map, for an integer
N ≥ 2, on a domain of generic characteristic zero isnot a ring homomor-
phism (!) — these domain and codomain (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theaters do
not admit anisomorphism that iscompatible, in the evident sense, with
the Θ-link.

===== PAGE 110 =====

110 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Thus, from the point of view of the analogy discussed in (TltSim),
(RCΘ3) the diagrams in the two displays of (ii) yield a situation analogous to
(RCRS3) in the sense thatneither the pairs
Gk♭ ↷C ♭
k; Gk ↷C k
[i.e., consisting of a topological ﬁeld equipped with a continuous action by
a topological group]nor the pairs
G† k ↷C † k; G‡ k ↷C ‡ k
are isomorphic, i.e.,regardless of whether or not one imposes a compat-
ibility condition[cf. (RCΘ1), (RCΘ2)] with the [analogue of the] Θ-link;
in particular, this situation yieldsinteresting counterexamplesto the ana-
logue [i.e., for perfectoid ﬁelds of characteristic zero and their tilts] of the
Neukirch-Uchida Theorem for number ﬁelds[cf. the discussion of Example
3.5.2, (iv)].
Here, we note in passing that in fact,
(RCΘ2lg) the property discussed in (RCΘ2) [which is in fact an immediate con-
sequence of thedeﬁnition of a ring!] is never logically appliedin the
developmentorproofsofthemainresults[suchas, forinstance, [IUTchIII],
Theorem 3.11, or [IUTchIII], Corollary 3.12] of inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory.
That is to say, even if one takes the position that one does not know whether or
not the property discussed in (RCΘ2) holds, there isno eﬀect whatsoeveron the
essential logical structureof the development or proofs of the main results [such
as, for instance, [IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11, or [IUTchIII], Corollary 3.12] of inter-
universal Teichm¨uller theory. Rather, the only eﬀect of taking such a position is
that it implies that there is a possibility that the theory involves a sort of“overkill”,
i.e., that one is possibly doing more than is in fact necessary in order to prove the
desired results.
(vii) Finally, we observe that
(StrDf) although the observation of (RCΘ3) is ofindependent interestin its
own right — e.g., from the point of view of the analogy between inter-
universal Teichm¨uller theory and the theory ofWitt vectorsand p-adic
Teichm¨uller theory discussed in the ﬁnal portion of [Alien],§3.3, (ii)
[cf. also the discussion of epiperfect schemes in [pTch], Chapter VI] —
relative to the analogy discussed in (TltSim), the sorts of pairs considered
in (RCΘ3) arecompletely uselessfrom the point of view of constructing
any sort of theory using these pairs that is in some sense structurally
analogous to inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory.
Oneimportantaspectof(StrDf)maybeseeninthediﬀerencesdiscussedin(TltDf1)
above [cf. also the discussion surrounding (DstCh), (DstHT) in the ﬁnal portion
of (iii)]. In the context of (TltDf1), it is also of interest to note that, unlike the
case of absolute Galois groups of ﬁnite extensions ofQp, which are ofcohomological

===== PAGE 111 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 111
dimension 2, the ﬁelds †k, ‡k of (iii) are ofcohomological dimension1. Another
important aspect of (StrDf) may be seen in thetwo fundamentally diﬀerent notions
of globalitydiscussed in (TltDf2) above. Other importantstructural diﬀerences,
i.e., aspects of (StrDf), all of which play acentral role in the essential logical
structure of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, include the following:
(TltDf3) The positive characteristicnature ofk♭ means thatk♭ does not admit
any sort of evident analogue of thep-adic logarithm,w h i c hi sfundamental
to the deﬁnition of thelog-link in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory.
(TltDf4) The positive characteristicnature ofk♭ means thatk♭ does not ad-
mit any sort of evident analogue of thepro-p portion of the theory of
cyclotomic rigidity surrounding the theta function,a sw e l la sl o c a l
and global ﬁelds [cf., e.g., the discussion of [Alien],§3.4, (v)], all of which
plays afundamental rolein inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory.
(TltDf5) Any situation such as the one described in (RCΘ3) — i.e., where the
topological ﬁeldsin the domain and codomain of the [analogue of the] Θ-
link arenot isomorphic— necessarilyfails to satisfy, i.e., even at the level
of ´etale-like objects,t h esymmetry property discussed in Example 3.2.2,
(ii-c), (iv), which plays afundamental rolein inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory, namely, in establishing the multiradiality properties that un-
derlie the multiradial representation of the Θ-pilot given in [IUTchIII],
Theorem 3.11 [cf. the discussion of Example 3.3.1 in (vi); the discussion
of the closely relatedbijectionC×\GL+
2 (R)/C× ∼
→ [0,1) in (InfH); [Alien],
§3.1, (iii); [Alien],§3.2; [Alien], §3.6, (i); [Alien],§3.7, (i)].
(TltDf6) The non-locally compact nature of perfectoid ﬁelds [i.e., the non-
openness discuss in (TltDf1)] means that ﬁelds such ask, †k, ‡k do not
admit any sort of evident analogue of the phenomenon ofcompatibility
of cyclotomic rigidity isomorphisms with the proﬁnite/tempered
topology, which plays afundamental rolein inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory [cf. the discussion of [Alien],§3.4, (v), as well as the discussion in
the present paper of“truncatibility”in Examples 3.8.3, 3.8.4, below].
(TltDf7) The non-locally compact nature of perfectoid ﬁelds [i.e., the non-
openness discuss in (TltDf1)] means that ﬁelds such ask, †k, ‡k do not
admit any sort of evident analogue of the notion oflog-volume,w h i c h
playsa fundamental roleininter-universalTeichm¨ullertheory, forinstance,
in the context of results such as [IUTchIII], Corollary 3.12; in particular,
there is no evident analogue of the notion oflog-volumeon ﬁnite subexten-
sions ofQp contained in†k, ‡k that can beshared in a consistent fashion
between the domain and codomain of isomorphisms as in the diagram of
the second displayof (ii).
§3.6. Chains of logical AND relations
From the point of view of thesimple qualitative modelof inter-universal Te-
ichm¨uller theory given in Example 2.4.5, the discussion of§3.4 concerns theAND
relator “∧”in the“Θ-link”portion of Example 2.4.5, (ii). On the other hand,
strictly speaking, this portion of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory only concerns
the initial deﬁnitionof the Θ-link. That is to say, thebulk of the theory developed
in [IUTchI-III] concerns, from the point of view of the simple qualitative model of

===== PAGE 112 =====

112 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory given in Example 2.4.5, (ii), thepreservation
of theAND relator “∧”as one passes from
· the “Θ-link”portion of Example 2.4.5, (ii), to
· the “multiradial representation”portion of Example 2.4.5, (ii).
By contrast, the passage from the“multiradial representation”portion of Example
2.4.5, (ii), to the“ﬁnal numerical estimate”portion of Example 2.4.5, (ii) — i.e.,
which corresponds to the passage from [IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11, to [IUTchIII],
Corollary 3.12 — is [cf. the discussion of the ﬁnal portion of Example 2.4.5, (ii)!]
relatively straightforward[cf. the discussion of§3.10, §3.11, below].
At this point, it is perhaps of interest to consider“typical symptoms”of
mathematicians who are operating underfundamental misunderstandingscon-
cerning the essential logical structure of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory. Such
typical symptoms, which are in fact closely related to one another, include the
following:
(Syp1) a sense of unjustiﬁed and acutely harsh abruptness in the pas-
sage from [IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11, to [IUTchIII], Corollary 3.12 [cf. the
discussion of the ﬁnal portions of Example 2.4.5, (ii), (iii)!];
(Syp2) a desire to see the “proof” of some sort ofcommutative diagramor
“compatibility property”to the eﬀect that takinglog-volumes of pilot
objects in the domain and codomain of the Θ-link yields thesame real
number[a property which, in fact, cannever be proved since it isfalse!—
cf. the discussion of§3.5];
(Syp3) a desire to see the inequality of the ﬁnal numerical estimate obtained
as the result of concatenating somechain of intermediate inequali-
ties, i.e., as is often done in proofs in real/complex/functional analysis or
analytic number theory.
Here, it should be noted that (Syp2) and (Syp3) often occur as approaches to
mitigating the “harsh abruptness” of (Syp1).
With regard to (Syp3), it should be emphasized that it isentirely unrealistic
to attempt to obtain theinequality of theﬁnal numerical estimateas the result of
concatenating some chain of intermediate inequalitiessince this is simplynot the
way in which the logical structure of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory is organized.
That is to say, in a word, the logical structure of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory
does not proceed by concatenating some sort of chain of intermediate inequalities.
Rather,
(∧-Chn) the logical structure of inter-universal Teichm¨
uller theory proceeds by
observing achain of AND relations“∧”
[cf. the discussion of [IUTchIII], Remark 3.9.5, (viii), (ix); [IUTchIII], Remark
3.12.2, (citw), (fitw); [Alien], §3.11, (iv), (v)]. As observed in Example 2.4.5, (ii),
(iii), once one follows thischain of AND relations “∧”up to and including the
multiradial representation of theΘ-pilot [i.e., [IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11], the pas-
sage to the ﬁnal numerical estimate [i.e., [IUTchIII], Corollary 3.12] isrelatively
straightforward[i.e., as one might expect, from the use of the word “corollary”!].

===== PAGE 113 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 113
One essentially formal consequence of (∧-Chn) is the following: Since thedeﬁ-
nitionoftheΘ-link, theconstructionofthe multiradial representation of theΘ-pilot,
and the ultimate passage to theﬁnal numerical estimateconsist of aﬁnite number
of steps, one natural and eﬀective way toanalyze/diagnose [cf. the discussion
of §1.4!] the precise content ofmisunderstandings of inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory is to determine
(∧-Dgns) precisely wherein the ﬁnite sequence of steps that appear is theﬁrst
stepatwhichthepersonfeelsthatthe preservationofthe crucial AND
relator “∧”i sno longer clear.
In some sense, thestarting pointof the variousAND relations“∧” that appear
in themultiradial algorithmof [IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11, is the observation that
(∧-Input) the input data for this multiradial algorithm consists solely of an
abstract F⊩▶×μ-prime-strip; moreover, this multiradial algorithm is
functorialwithrespecttoarbitraryisomorphismsbetween F⊩▶×μ-prime-
strips
[cf. [IUTchIII], Remark 3.11.1, (ii); the ﬁnal portion of [Alien], §3.7, (i)]. This
property (∧-Input) means that the multiradial algorithm may be applied toany
F⊩▶×μ-prime-strip that appears, or alternatively/equivalently, thatany F⊩▶×μ-
prime-strip may serve as thegluing data [cf. the “γJ” in the analogies discussed
in §3.2, (StR3), (StR4), as well as Example 2.4.5, (ii)!] between agiven situation
[i.e., such as the (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theater in thecodomainof the Θ-link!] and the
content of the multiradial algorithm.
On the other hand, in order to conclude that the multiradial algorithm yields
output datasatisfying suitableAND relations “∧”, it is necessary also to examine
in detail the content of this output data, i.e., in particular, in the context of the
central IPL and SHE properties discussed in [IUTchIII], Remark 3.11.1, (iii), as
well as thechain of (sub)quotientsaspect of the SHE property [cf. [IUTchIII],
Remark 3.11.1, (iii); [IUTchIII], Remark 3.9.5, (viii), (ix)]. In a word, the essential
“principle” that is applied throughout the various steps of the multiradial algorithm
in order to derive new AND relations “∧”from old AND relations “∧”is the
following “principle of extension of indeterminacies”:
(ExtInd) If A, B,a n dC are propositions, then it holds [thatB =⇒ B ∨ C and
hence] that
A ∧ B =⇒ A ∧ (B ∨ C).
One important tool that is frequently used in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory in
a fashion that is closely related to (ExtInd) is the notion of apoly-morphism [cf.
the discussion of§3.7 below for more details].
In the context of (ExtInd), it is interesting to note that, from the point of view
of the discussion of§3.4,
the “∨” that appears in the conclusion — i.e.,A ∧ (B ∨ C) — of (ExtInd)
may be understood as amounting to essentially thesame phenomenonas
the “∨” that appears in (NeuORInd2) [e.g., by taking “C”t ob eA].

===== PAGE 114 =====

114 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
That is to say, instead ofgenerating AND relations “∧” tautologicallyby means of
the introduction ofdistinct labels[i.e., as in (AOΘ1)] — i.e., say, by introducing a
new distinct labelfor “C” so as to conclude a tautological relation
A ∧ B ∧ C
— (ExtInd) allows one to generate new AND relations “∧”while avoiding the
introduction ofnew distinct labels. As discussed in§3.4, this point of view [i.e., of
avoiding the introduction of new distinct labels] leads inevitably toOR relations
“∨”, i.e., as in (NeuORInd2) or as in the conclusion “A ∧ (B ∨ C)” of (ExtInd).
As discussed above, the reason that one wishes toavoid the introduction ofnew
distinct labels when applying (ExtInd) is precisely that
(sQLTL) one wishes to apply (ExtInd) to form “(sub)quotients/splittings”
of the log-theta-lattice [cf. the title of [IUTchIII]!], i.e., toproject the
vertical line on the left-hand side of the inﬁnite “H”p o r t i o no ft h el o g -
theta-lattice onto thevertical line on the right-hand side of this inﬁnite
“H” by somehow achieving some sort of“crushing together”of distinct
coordinates [i.e., “(n,m)”, wheren,m ∈ Z] of the log-theta-lattice
[cf. the discussion of§3.11 below; [IUTchIII], Remark 3.9.5, (viii), (ix); [IUTchIII],
Remark 3.12.2, (citw), (fitw); [Alien], §3.11, (iv), (v)).
At this point, it is of interest to note that there are, in some sense,two waysin
which(ExtInd)isappliedduringtheexecutionofthevariousstepsofthemultiradial
algorithm [cf. the discussion of§3.10, §3.11, below, for more details]:
(ExtInd1) operations that consist of simply addingmore possibilites/indeter-
minacies [which corresponds to passing fromB to B ∨ C] within some
ﬁxed container;
(ExtInd2) operations in which oneidentiﬁes [i.e., “crushes together”, by passing
from B to B ∨ C] objects withdistinct labels, at the cost of passing to
a situation in which the object is regarded as being only knownup to
isomorphism.
Typical examples of (ExtInd1) include theupper semi-continuity of (Ind3),a sw e l l
as the passage toholomorphic hulls. Typically, such applications of (ExtInd1) play
an important role in establishing varioussymmetry or invarianceproperties such
asmultiradiality. Thissortofestablishmentofvarious symmetryorinvarianceprop-
erties by means of (ExtInd1) then allows one to applylabel crushing operations
as in (ExtInd2). Put another way,
· (ExtInd1) may be understood as a sort of operation whose purpose is to
prepare suitable descent data, while
· (ExtInd2) may be thought of as a sort of actualdescent operation, i.e.,
from data thatdependson the speciﬁcation of a member of some collection
of distinct labelsto data that isindependent of such a label speciﬁcation.
[We refer to the discussion of§3.8 below for more details onfoundational aspects
of (ExtInd2) and to the discussion of§3.9 below for more details concerning the
notion of“descent”.] Typical examples of (ExtInd2) in inter-universal Teichm¨uller

===== PAGE 115 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 115
theory are the following [cf. the notational conventions of [IUTchI], Deﬁnition 3.1,
(e), (f)]:
· identifying “Πv”’s [wherev ∈ V]a t diﬀerent vertical coordinates[i.e.,
“(n,m)” and “(n,m′)”, forn,m,m ′ ∈ Z] of the log-theta-lattice, which
results in a“Πv regarded up to isomorphism”that is labeled by anew label
“(n, ◦)”;
· identifying “Gv”’s [wherev ∈ V]a tdiﬀerent horizontal or vertical coor-
dinates [i.e., “(n,m)” and “(n′,m′)”, forn,n′,m,m ′ ∈ Z] of the log-theta-
lattice, which results in a“Gv regarded up to isomorphism”that is labeled
by anew label“(◦, ◦)”;
· identifying the F⊩▶×μ-prime-strips in theΘ-link that arise from the Θ-
andq-pilotobjectsindistinct(Θ ±ellNF-)Hodgetheaters[i.e., the(Θ±ellNF-
)Hodge theaters in thedomain and codomain of the Θ-link] by working
with these F⊩▶×μ-prime-strips up to isomorphism.
In some sense, the mostnontrivial instancesof the application of (ExtInd) in
the context of the multiradial algorithm occur in relation to thelog-Kummer-
correspondence [i.e., in thevertical lineon theleft-hand sideof the inﬁnite “H”]
and closely related operations ofGalois evaluation [cf. the discussion of §3.11
below]. The Kummer theoriesthat appear in thislog-Kummer-correspondence —
i.e., Kummer theories for
· multiplicative monoidsof nonzero elements of rings of integers inmixed-
characteristic local ﬁelds,
· mono-theta environments/theta monoids,a n d
· pseudo-monoids ofκ-coric functions
— involve the construction of various[Kummer] isomorphismsbetween
· Frobenius-like dataand
· corresponding data constructed via anabelian algorithms from ´etale-like
objects.
The output of such algorithms typically involves constructing the“corresponding
data”as one possibility among many. Here, we note that
either of these Frobenius-like/´etale-like versions of“corresponding data”is
— unlike, for instance, the data that constitutes anF⊩▶×μ-prime-strip!
— suﬃciently robustthat it completely determines [even when only
regarded up to isomorphism!] the[usual] embeddingof the Θ-pilot.
That is to say, taken as a whole, themultiradial algorithm— and, especially, the
portion of the multiradial algorithm that involves thelog-Kummer correspondence
and closely related operations ofGalois evaluation— plays the role of
exhibiting the Frobenius-likeΘ-pilot as one possibility within a collec-
tion of possibilitiesconstructed via anabelian algorithms from ´etale-like
data.
Thus, in this situation, one obtains thecrucial preservation of the AND relation
“∧”by applying (ExtInd) twice, i.e., by applying

===== PAGE 116 =====

116 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
· (ExtInd1) to the enlargement of thecollection of possibilitiesunder
consideration and
· (ExtInd2) to theKummer isomorphisms involved, when one passes
from Frobenius-like object labels“(n,m)” [wheren,m ∈ Z]t o ´etale-like
object labels“(n, ◦)” [wheren ∈ Z].
This is precisely what is meant by thechain of (sub)quotientsaspect of the SHE
property [cf. [IUTchIII], Remark 3.11.1, (iii); [IUTchIII], Remark 3.9.5, (viii), (ix)]
discussed above [cf. also the discussion of§3.10, §3.11, below].
§3.7. Poly-morphisms and logical AND relations
Poly-morphisms—i.e., setsofmorphismsbetweenobjects—appearthrough-
out inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory as a tool for facilitating
the explicit enumerationof acollection of possibilities.
Composable ordered pairs of poly-morphisms [i.e., pairs for which the domain of
the ﬁrst member in the pair coincides with the codomain of the second member
in the pair] may be composed by considering the set of morphisms obtained by
composing the morphisms that belong to the sets of morphisms that constitute the
given pair of poly-morphisms. Such compositions of poly-morphisms allow one to
keep track—i na preciseand explicit fashion — ofcollections of possibilities under
consideration.
From the point of view ofchains of AND relations “∧”, as discussed in
§3.6,
the collections of possibilities enumerated bypoly-morphisms are to
be understood as being related to one another viaOR relations “∨”.
That is to say, poly-morphisms may be thought of as a sort ofindeterminacy,
whichisusedininter-universalTeichm¨ ullertheorytoproducestructuresthatsatisfy
various symmetry or invariance properties, hence yield suitabledescent data
[cf. the discussion of (ExtInd1) in§3.6; the discussion of§3.9 below].
Thus, for instance, in the case of thefull poly-isomorphismthat constitutes the
Θ-link, one may understand thefundamental AND relation “∧”of (AOΘ1) —
which, for simplicity, we denote by
A ∧ B
[where A and B correspond, respectively, in the notation of the discussion of§3.4,
to “∗ :→
‡q-plt ∈ ‡Ring”a n d“∗ :→ †Θ-plt ∈ †Ring”] — may be understood as
ar e l a t i o n“A ∧ (B1 ∨ B2 ∨ ... )”, i.e., a relation to the eﬀect that
if oneﬁxes the q-pilot ‡q-plt, then thisq-pilot isglued, via the Θ-link,
to the Θ-pilot †Θ-plt by means of one isomorphism [of the full poly-
isomorphism that constitutes the Θ-link] oranother isomorphism,o ryet
another isomorphism,e t c .
[Here, the various possible gluings that constituteB are denoted byB1, B2, ... .]
In particular, as discussed in (∧-Chn), if one starts with the Θ-link and then con-
siders varioussubsequent logical AND relations “∧”that arise — for instance, by
considering variouscomposites of poly-morphisms! — by applying (ExtInd), then

===== PAGE 117 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 117
(∧(∨)-Chn) the essential logical structureof inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, as
discussed in (∧-Chn), may be understood as follows:
A ∧ B = A ∧ (B1 ∨ B2 ∨ ... )
=⇒ A ∧ (B1 ∨ B2 ∨ ... ∨ B′
1 ∨ B′
2 ∨ ... )
=⇒ A ∧ (B1 ∨ B2 ∨ ... ∨ B′
1 ∨ B′
2 ∨ ... ∨ B′′
1 ∨ B′′
2 ∨ ... )
...
Finally, we recall that various“classical examples”of the notion of a poly-
morphism include
· the collection of maps betweentopological spacesthat constitutes aho-
motopy class,o rstable homotopy class,o fm a p s ;
· the collection of morphisms between complexes that constitutes a mor-
phism of the associatedderived category;
· the collection of morphisms obtained by considering some sort oforbit by
some sort ofgroup actionon the domain or codomain of a given morphism
[cf. the discussion of [Rpt2018],§13, (PMEx1), (PMEx2), (PMQut)]. Also, in this
context, it is useful to recall [cf. the discussion of [Alien],§4.1, (iv)] that
· gluings via poly-morphismsare closely related to the sorts of gluings
that occur in the construction ofalgebraic stacks[i.e., algebraic stacks
which arenot algebraic spaces].
§3.8. Inter-universality and logical AND relations
One fundamental aspect of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory lies in the con-
sideration of distinct universes that arise naturally when one considersGalois
categories—i.e., ´etale fundamental groups—associatedtovariousschemes. Here,
it is important to note that, when phrased in this way,
this fundamental aspect of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory is, at least
from the point of view ofmathematical foundations, no diﬀerentfrom
the situation that arises in [SGA1].
On the other hand, the fundamental diﬀerence between the situation considered
in [SGA1] and the situations considered in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory lies
in the fact that, whereas in [SGA1], the various distinct schemes that appear are
related to one another by means ofmorphisms of schemes or rings,
the various distinct schemes that appear in inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory are related to one another, in general, by means of relations —
such as thelog- and Θ-links —t h a ta r enon-ring/scheme-theoretic in
nature, i.e., in the sense that they donot arise from morphisms of schemes
or rings.
In general, when considering relations between distinct mathematical objects, it
is of fundamental importance to specify those mathematical structures that are

===== PAGE 118 =====

118 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
common — i.e., in the terminology of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory,coric —
to the various distinct mathematical objects under consideration. Here, we observe
that
this notion of being “common”/“coric” to the various distinct mathemat-
ical objects under consideration constitutes, when formulated at a formal,
symbolic level, alogical AND relation “∧”.
— cf. the discussion of§3.2 [cf., especially, Example 3.2.2],§3.4, §3.5, §3.6, §3.7.
Thus, in the situations considered in [SGA1], thering/scheme structuresof the
various distinct schemes that appear arecoric and hence allow one to relate the
universes/Galois categories/´etale fundamental groups associated to these distinct
schemes in a way that makes use of thecommon ring/scheme structures between
these schemes. At a concrete level, this means that
in the situations considered in [SGA1], ´etale fundamental groups may be
related to one another in such a way that the onlyindeterminacies that
occur areinner automorphism indeterminacies.
Moreover, these inner automorphism indeterminacies areby no means superﬂuous
— cf. the discussion of Examples 3.8.1, 3.8.2, 3.8.3, 3.8.4 below.
Example 3.8.1: Inevitability of inner automorphism indeterminacies.
The unavoidability of inner automorphism indeterminaciesmay be understood in
very elementary terms, as follows.
(i) Let k be a perfect ﬁeld; k an algebraic closureof k; N ⊆ Gk
def
= Gal(k/k)
a normal closed subgroupof Gk; σ∈ Gk such that the automorphismισ: N
∼
→ N
of N given by conjugating by σis not inner. [One veriﬁes immediately that, for
instance, ifk is anumber ﬁeldor amixed-characteristic local ﬁeld, then suchN, σdo
indeed exist.] WritekN ⊆ k for the subﬁeld ofN-invariants ofk, GkN
def
= N ⊆ Gk,
QN
def
= Gk/GkN . Then observe that this situation yields an example of a situation
in which one may verify directly that
the functoriality of the ´etale fundamental group only holds if one
allows for inner automorphism indeterminacies in the deﬁnition of
the ´etale fundamental group.
Indeed, let us ﬁrst observe that the “basepoints”of k and kN determined by k
allows us to regardGk and GkN , respectively, as the´etale fundamental groupsof
k and kN. Thus, if one assumes that the functoriality of the ´etale fundamental
group holds even in the absence of inner automorphism indeterminacies, then the
commutative diagram of schemes
Spec(kN)
σ
−→ Spec(kN)
↘↙
Spec(k)

===== PAGE 119 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 119
[where the diagonal morphisms are the natural morphisms] induces acommutative
diagram of proﬁnite groups
GkN
ισ
−→ GkN
↘↙
Gk
— which [since the natural inclusionN = GkN ↪→ Gk is injective!] implies thatισ
is theidentity automorphism, in contradiction to our assumption concerningσ!
(ii) The phenomenon discussed in (i) may be understood as a consequence of
the fact that, whereas Spec(k)i scoric in thecommutative diagram of schemesthat
appears in (i) [i.e., in the sense that this diagramdoes indeed commute!], Spec(k)
is not coricin thediagram of schemes
Spec(k)
↙↘
Spec(kN)
σ
−→ Spec(kN)
↘↙
Spec(k)
[where the diagonal morphisms are the natural morphisms], i.e., in the sense that
the upper portion of this diagramdoes not commute!
(iii) Finally, we consider thenatural exact sequence
1 −→ GkN −→ Gk −→ QN −→ 1
of proﬁnite groups. Then observe that theinner automorphisms indeterminacies
of Gk [cf. the discussion of (i), (ii)!] induceouter automorphism indeterminacies
of GkN that willnot, in general, beinner.T h a ti st os a y ,
if one considersGkN in the context of thisnatural exact sequence,t h e n
one must in fact considerGkN [not only up to inner automorphism in-
determinacies, i.e., as discussed in (i), (ii),but also] up to certainouter
automorphism indeterminacies.
Relative to the point of view of the discussion of (ii), theseouter automorphism
indeterminacies may be understood as a consequence of the fact that, in the context
of theﬁeld extensionsk ⊆ kN ⊆ k and theautomorphisms of these ﬁeld extensions
induced by elements ofGk,
the ﬁeldk is coric, whereas the ﬁeldkN is not coric
—i.e., inthecontextoftheseﬁeldextensionsandautomorphismsofﬁeldextensions,
the relationship ofk to the various ﬁeld extensions that appear isconstant and
ﬁxed, whereas the relationship ofkN to the various ﬁeld extensions that appear is

===== PAGE 120 =====

120 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
variable, i.e., subject toindeterminacies arising from the action of elements of
Gk.
Example 3.8.2: Inter-universality and the structure of (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge
theaters. In the following discussion of(Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theaters,w eﬁ xac o l -
lection ofinitial Θ-data
(F/F, XF,l ,C K, V, Vbad
mod,ϵ )
as in [IUTchI], Deﬁnition 3.1, and apply the notational conventions of [IUTchI],
Deﬁnition 3.1. In particular, we recall thatE
def
= EF is an elliptic curve over the
number ﬁeldF; F is analgebraic closureof F; l is aprime number; K ⊆ F is the
extension ﬁeld ofF determined by the composite of the ﬁelds of deﬁnition of the
closed points of the ﬁnite group schemeE[l] ⊆ E of l-torsion pointsof E; Fmod ⊆ F
is theﬁeld of moduliof E, i.e., the ﬁeld extension of the ﬁeld of rational numbers
generated by thej-invariant ofE. For simplicity, we assume thatl> 5.
(i) We begin by recalling the following:
(i-a) Thepointofviewof classical Galois theorywithregardto constructing
ﬁnite Galois extensions of ﬁeldsmay be summarized, in the case of the
Galois extensionK/F, as follows:
· o n es t a r t sw i t habase ﬁeldF;
· one then constructs a ﬁnite ﬁeld extension K of F that is
saturatedwith respect toGalois conjugationover F.
Thus, relative to this classical point of view, one is constrained to viewing
the situation from the point of view of thebase ﬁeld F. This constraint
obliges one to always take into account theentirety of Galois conjugates
[over F] of objects associated toK.
The point of view of (i-a) isfundamentally incompatiblewith themain goalof
the construction of (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theaters in [IUTchI], namely, thesimulation
of a global multiplicative subspaceof E[l] [cf. the discussion ofglobal multi-
plicative subspacesin [IUTchI], §I1; [Alien], §2.3, §2.4; [Alien], §3.3, (iv), as well
as Example 3.2.1, (vi), of the present paper], together with aglobal canonical
generator,u pt o±1, of the quotient ofE[l] by the global multiplicative subspace
[cf. the discussion ofglobal canonical generatorsin [IUTchI],§I1; [Alien], §3.3, (iv),
as well as Example 3.2.1, (vi), of the present paper]. In some sense, the technical
starting point of the“simulation of a global multiplicative subspace”implemented
in [IUTchI] may be summarized as follows:
(i-b) The “simulation of a global multiplicative subspace”g i v e ni n[ I U T c h I ]i s
achieved by, in some sense,reversingthe ﬂow of the classical construction
reviewed in (i-a), i.e., by
· viewing the situation [not from the point of view of thebase ﬁeld
F, but rather] from the point of view of thehyperbolic orbicurve
CK
— which may be thought of as data that amounts toK, together
with aﬁxed choice of aquotient “Q”[cf. [IUTchI], Deﬁnition

===== PAGE 121 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 121
3.1, (f)] of E[l], i.e., whosekernel is to serve as the“simulated
global multiplicative subspace”—a n d
· regarding the base ﬁeld Fmod — or, at the level of hyperbolic
orbicurves, CFmod [cf. [IUTchI], Remark 3.1.7, (i)] — as aﬁnite
´etale quotient of K [or, at the level of hyperbolic orbicurves,
CK], i.e., which amounts to thinking in terms of [compatible]
ﬁnite ´etale quotients
Spec(K) ↠ Spec(Fmod),C K → CFmod
— which are regarded asobjects constructed fromSpec(K), CK.
This approach allows one to concentrate on aﬁxed [simulated global mul-
tiplicative] subspace and hence [unlike the situation discussed in (i-a)!]
to exclude the various nontrivialGalois conjugatesover F of this ﬁxed
simulated global multiplicative subspace.
The approach of (i-b) hasnumerous important technical consequences[to be dis-
cussed in (ii), (iii), (iv), below].
(ii) From the point of view of´etale-like objects [i.e., arithmetic fundamental
groups], constructingaquotientCK → CFmod asin(i-b)correspondstoconstructing
a proﬁnite group “ΠCFmod
” from the proﬁnite group ΠCK that contains ΠCK as an
open subgroup. In light of the well-knownslimness of ΠCFmod
[cf., e.g., [AbsTopI],
Proposition 2.3, (ii)], such a construction of “ΠCFmod
” amounts to the construction
of aﬁnite groupof outer automorphismsof some open subgroup of ΠCK . This ﬁnite
group may be thought of as aﬁnite quotient groupΠCFmod
↠ Γmod of ΠCFmod
.I f
we think of theabsolute Galois groupGFmod of the number ﬁeldFmod as aquotient
ΠCFmod
↠ GFmod of ΠCFmod
, then this ﬁnite quotient group Γmod determines a ﬁnite
quotient group GFmod ↠ ΓGal
mod of GFmod. Here, we recall from the construction
of [IUTchI], Example 4.3, (i), that ΓGal
mod has a natural subquotient that may be
identiﬁed withF⋇
l
def
= F×
l /{±1}, i.e., which corresponds to themultiplicative F⋇
l -
symmetry of the (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theater. In particular, ΓGal
mod, hence also Γmod,
is a ﬁnite group of order> 2, which implies, by well-known properties of absolute
Galois groups of number ﬁelds [cf., e.g., [NSW], Theorem 12.1.7] that
(NoSpl) The surjection GFmod ↠ ΓGal
mod of proﬁnite groups does not admit a
splitting.
Here, we note that [in light of the well-knownslimness of GFmod — cf., e.g., [Ab-
sTopI], Theorem 1.7, (iii)] this non-existence of a splitting may be reformulated
as the assertion that thenatural outer actionof ΓGal
mod on the kernel Ker(GFmod ↠
ΓGal
mod)d o e snot admit a lifting to anaction of ΓGal
mod on Ker(GFmod ↠ ΓGal
mod), i.e.,
to an action that isfree of inner automorphism indeterminacies. In particular, it
follows [a fortiori!] that thenatural outer actionof Γmod on Ker(ΠCFmod
↠ Γmod)
does not admit a lifting to anaction of Γmod on Ker(ΠCFmod
↠ Γmod), i.e., to an
action that isfree of inner automorphism indeterminacies. That is to say, in sum-
mary, theinner automorphism indeterminaciesin these natural outer actions
are essential and unavoidable.
(iii) The existence of theinner automorphism indeterminaciesdiscussed in (ii)
implies, in particular, that thepermutations of prime-strips in the multiplicative

===== PAGE 122 =====

122 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
symmetry portionof a (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theater induced by theF⋇
l -symmetries
of the (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theaternecessarilygive rise toinner automorphism indeter-
minacies in the isomorphisms between the copies oflocal absolute Galois groupsGv
[where v ∈ Vnon] that appear in prime-strips withdistinct labels∈ F⋇
l [cf. [IUTchI],
Remark 4.5.1, (iii); [IUTchII], Remark 2.5.2, (iii); [IUTchII], Remarks 4.7.2, 4.7.6;
[Alien], §3.6, (iii)]. Put another way,
(NoSyn) there is no well-deﬁned synchronizationbetween these copies ofGv
that appear in prime-strips at distinct labels∈ F⋇
l that isfree of inner
automorphism — i.e.,conjugacy — indeterminacies.
In this context, we recall that such aconjugate synchronizationis offundamen-
tal importancein inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory since it is necessary in order to
construct the data that appears in theunit group portionof theF⊩▶×μ-prime-strip
that appears in thedomain of the Θ-link, i.e., data that is required to befree of
any dependence on the distinct labels∈ F⋇
l . Such aconjugate synchronizationis
achievedbyapplyingthe F⋊±
l -symmetries[wherewerecallthat F⋊±
l
def
= Fl⋊{±1},
i.e., relative to the natural action of{±1} on Fl]i nt h eadditive symmetry portionof
the (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theater under consideration [cf. [IUTchII], Corollary 3.5, (i);
[IUTchII], Remark 3.5.2, (iii); [IUTchII], Remark 4.5.3, (i); [IUTchIII], Theorem
1.5, (iii); [IUTchIII], Remark 1.5.1, (i); [Alien],§3.6, (ii)]. Here, we observe that in
order to achieve thisconjugate synchronizationvia theF⋊±
l -symmetryof the various
copies ofGv that appear in prime-strips with distinct labels, it is of fundamental
importance to keep these copies ofGv isolated from theabsolute Galois groups
of number ﬁelds that appear in the discussion of (ii) [i.e., since, as observed in
(ii), it is precisely the intrinsic structure of these global absolute Galois groups that
gives rise to theunwanted inner automorphism/conjugacy indeterminacies!]. This
local-global isolation requirement— i.e., in eﬀect, the requirement that
(LGIsl) these copies of the local absolute Galois groupGv be regarded not as
subgroups of some global absolute Galois group, but rather as coric
objects that are treated as beingindependent of any sort of embedding
into aglobal absolute Galois group
[cf. [IUTchII],Remark4.7.6; [Alien], §3.6, (iii)]—willhave important consequences,
as we shall see in the discussion of (iv) below.
(iv) As discussed in (iii), the issue
(SymIsl) of isolating the F⋊±
l -symmetry from the F⋇
l -symmetry in order to
achieve conjugate synchronization
is one important reason for imposing thelocal-global isolation requirement(LGIsl)
in the context of the construction of (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theaters. In fact, however,
this property (LGIsl) is fundamental to theentire structureof a (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge
theater [cf., [IUTchI], Fig. 6.5; [Alien], Fig. 3.8]. That is to say, the issue (SymIsl)
maybethoughtofasbeingreﬂectedinthe gluingalongcertaincollectionsofprime-
strips between theadditive and multiplicative symmetry portions of the (Θ±ellNF-
)Hodge theater [cf., [IUTchI], Fig. 6.5; [Alien], Fig. 3.8]. In fact, however,
(SctNF) even within the multiplicative symmetry portionof a (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge
theater, the goal ofsimulating a global canonical generatorrequires

===== PAGE 123 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 123
one to treat the various prime-strips that appear in the multiplicative
symmetryportionofthe(Θ ±ellNF-)Hodgetheateras “sections”,i ns o m e
suitable sense, of the ﬁnite ´etale quotientSpec(K) ↠ Spec(Fmod)
— a point of view that isfundamentally incompatiblewith theprime decompo-
sition trees of the number ﬁelds K, Fmod, hence again requires one to impose
(LGIsl) [cf. [IUTchI], Remarks 4.3.1, 4.3.2; [Alien],§3.3, (iv)]. On the other hand,
let us recall that thering structureof the nonarchimedean local ﬁeld that gives rise
to Gv cannot be reconstructedfrom the abstract topological groupGv [cf. [NSW],
the Closing Remark preceding Theorem 12.2.7; [AbsTopIII],§I3; [Alien], Example
2.12.3, (i)]. In particular, once one imposes (LGIsl), thecrucial reconstruction of
the ring structuresof the nonarchimedean local ﬁelds that give rise to the various
copies ofGv — where we recall that such ring structures play afundamental and
indispensable role in the deﬁnition of thelog-link! — can only be conducted if one
applies theabsolute anabelian algorithmsof [AbsTopIII],§1, locallyat eachv ∈ Vnon
[not toGv, but rather] to Πv, i.e., one must always regard eachcoric copy ofGv as
a “certain quotient”of a correspondingcoric copy of Πv. Indeed, from a historical
point of view[cf. the discussion of [IUTchI], Remark 4.3.2],
it was precisely theselocal-global isolation aspects — i.e., surround-
ing (LGIsl), as discussed in (iii) and the present (iv) — of the structure
of (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theaters that motivated the author to develop the
absolute anabelian algorithmsof [AbsTopIII], §1, in the ﬁrst place!
Example 3.8.3: Truncated vs. proﬁnite Kummer theory and compatibil-
ity with the p-adic logarithm. In the following discussion, we ﬁx notation as
follows: Letk be aﬁnite extensionof Qp, for some prime numberp; k an algebraic
closure of k.W r i t e
· Gk
def
= Gal(k/k);
·O k for the ring of integers ofk, with maximal idealmk ⊆O k;
·O ⊿
k ⊆O k for the multiplicative monoid of nonzero elements ofOk;
·O ×
k ⊆O ⊿
k for the group of invertible elements ofO⊿
k ;
·O ×
k ↠ O×μ
k for the quotient of O×
k by the subgroup μ∞ of torsion
elements [i.e.,roots of unity]o f O×
k ;
· logk : O×
k ↠ k for thep-adic logarithmon O×
k .
Thus, Gk acts naturally onO×μ
k ↞ O×
k ⊆O ⊿
k ⊆O k.L e tΠ↠ Gk be atopological
group equipped with a surjection ontoGk, which determines natural actions of Π
on O×μ
k ↞ O×
k ⊆O ⊿
k ⊆O k. We shall often think of the pairGk ↷ O⊿
k or the pair
Π↷ O⊿
k “abstractly”as a pair consisting of an abstract topological monoid [i.e.,
O⊿
k ] equipped with a continuous action by an abstract topological group [i.e.,Gk
or Π]. Also, we shall writeN≥1 for the multiplicative monoid of positive natural
numbers.

===== PAGE 124 =====

124 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(i) Thethree types of Kummer theorythat occur in inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory [cf. the discussion of Example 3.8.4, (i-a), (i-b), (i-c), below] involveKum-
mer towers that consist of N-th power maps,f o rN ∈ N≥1, on the monoids
involved. In the case of the pairGk ↷ O⊿
k , one observes immediately that such
N-th power mapssatisfy the following properties [cf. the discussion of [IUTchII],
Remark 3.6.4, (i)], where we assume thatN ≥ 2:
(i-a) the N-th power mapO⊿
k ↠ O⊿
k is not a ring homomorphism, i.e., isnot
compatiblewiththe additive structureunderlyingthe ring structure
on O⊿
k ∪{ 0};
(i-b) the N-th power mapO⊿
k ↠ O⊿
k is (Π↠) Gk-equivariant, hence may be
thought of as inducing on´etale-like cyclotomesconstructed viaanabelian
algorithms from Gk or Π the isomorphism functorially induced by some
— at least from ana prioripoint of view —indeterminate automor-
phism [cf. (i-a), which implies thatGk or Π must be treated asabstract
topological groups,t h a ti st os a y ,a so p p o s e dt ogroups of ring/ﬁeld auto-
morphisms, i.e.,“Galois groups/arithmetic fundamental groups”; the dis-
cussion preceding Example 3.8.1; the discussion following Example 3.8.4
below; the discussion of (vi-c) below] ofGk or Π;
(i-c) the N-th power mapO⊿
k ↠ O⊿
k alters, at least from ana prioripoint of
view, cyclotomic rigidity isomorphisms— but not synchronizations
between collections of cyclotomic rigidity isomorphisms! — between´etale-
like cyclotomes[cf. (i-b)] and[Frobenius-like] cyclotomesarising from the
torsion subgroup of O⊿
k — cf., e.g., the [in general]nontrivial action of
the N-th power map on then-th roots of unity inO⊿
k for n ∈ N≥1 prime
to N.
Note that it follows from (i-a) that, if we think of a“basepoint”as aparticular
“rigid” choiceof analgebraic closurethat isfree of any conjugacy orN-th power
map indeterminacies, then whereas
(i-d) the p-adic logarithm
k ⊇O ⊿
k ⊇O ×
k
logk
−→ k ⊇O ⊿
k ⊇O ×
k
yields a precise, well-deﬁned — and, in particular,free of any conjugacy or
N-th power map indeterminacies!— set-theoretic[but not ring-theoretic!]
relationship between
· thebasepointofthe[“abstract”]copyof Gk ↷ O⊿
k inthe domain
of logk and
· the basepoint of the [“abstract”] copy ofGk ↷ O⊿
k in the
codomainof logk
[where we think of both of these copies ofGk ↷ O⊿
k as constituent objects
in the respective Kummer towers in the domain/codomain of logk,a s
discussed above], i.e.,
a single uniﬁed basepoint
that issimultaneously validfor both the domain and codomain of logk,

===== PAGE 125 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 125
(i-e) the map Logk induced by thep-adic logarithm logk on inverse limitsof
the Kummer tower
lim←−N
k ⊇ lim←−N
O⊿
k ⊇ lim←−N
O×
k
Logk
−→ k ⊇O ⊿
k ⊇O ×
k
[wheretheinverselimitsareover N ∈ N≥1, andwerecallthat raising to the
N-th poweron the “O⊿
k ”i nt h edomain of logk corresponds tomultiplying
by N on the “k”i nt h ecodomainof logk] only yields a relationship between
· the inverse limit basepointin thedomain of Logk and
· the basepointassociated to asingle constituent Kummer tower
object [with aﬁxed additive structure!] in thecodomain of Logk
[i.e., “O×
k ” as opposed to “lim←−N
O×
k ”].
Note, moreover, that it follows from (i-b), (i-c) that thebasepoint shifts that
occur as one passes between diﬀerentconstituent Kummer tower objectsvia various
N-th power mapsare indeed — at least from ana prioripoint of view —substan-
tive/nontrivialin the context ofcyclotomic rigidity isomorphismsor synchroniza-
tions between cyclotomes.
(ii) The situation discussed in (i-e) may be understood as a consequence of the
fact that
(ii-a) the Kummer tower inverse limit “lim←−” [where we omit the subscript
N to simplify notation] isbiased toward themultiplicative structure
of the rings involved — i.e., at the expense of theadditive structures of
these rings [cf. (i-a)] — hencefundamentally incompatible with the
“juggling/rotation/permutation”of the additive and multiplicative
structures that arises from the log-link [cf. the discussion of Example
3.3.2, (iv)].
In the situation of (i-e), we observe, moreover, that the problem of constructing
some sort of“hyper-multiplicative tower”of copies of, say, the lim←− O×
k in thedomain
of Logk that lifts [i.e., relative to Logk]t h e[multiplicative] Kummer towerof copies
of O×
k ⊆O ⊿
k ⊆ k in thecodomainof Logk appears to beunrealistically intractable:
Indeed, compatibility, relative to Logk, with the [multiplicative] Kummer tower
in the codomain of Logk would imply that thetransition maps of such a“hyper-
multiplicative tower”would, at least at a purely formal computational level (!),
necessarily be of the form
x = exp(log(x)) ↦→ exp({log(x)}M)
=e x p ({log(x)}·{ log(x)}M−1)= x{log(x)}M−1
—w h e r eM ∈ N≥1, and the notation “exp(−)” and “log(−)” is intended in apurely
formal computational sense(!). On the other hand,
(ii-b) it seems diﬃcult to conceive of any sort of natural approach to construct-
ing such“hyper-multiplicative transition maps”
lim←− O×
k → lim←− O×
k

===== PAGE 126 =====

126 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
that realize the purely formal computation “x ↦→ x{log(x)}M−1
”f o r
x ∈ lim←− O×
k and, moreover, allow one to relate, in some natural way, the
[multiplicative] Kummer theoryassociated to the lim←− O×
k in thedo-
main of the transition map to the corresponding [multiplicative] Kummer
theory associated to the lim←− O×
k in thecodomain of the transition map.
(iii) Note that the conditions imposed on the“hyper-multiplicative transition
maps”in(ii-b)arestatedinasomewhatroughandimpreciseway. Althoughitisnot
clear at the time of writing how to make these conditions completely precise, it does,
however, seem natural to consider the possibility of theexistence of commutative
diagrams as in (iii-a) below, i.e., where one thinks of “Z”a sas o r to fcandidate for
the inverse limitof the “hyper-multiplicative transition maps” of (ii-b). That is to
say, theexistence of such a commutative diagram may be thought of as a sort of
necessary conditionfor the existence of a suitable system of “hyper-multiplicative
transition maps” as in (ii-b). [Here, we note that thesurjectivity condition of (iii-
a) below may be understood as a sort of “very weak necessary” version of the
domain/codomain Kummer theory-relatabilitycondition of (ii-b).] In fact, however,
we observe that, in the situation of (ii-b) [and the surrounding discussion], such a
commutative diagram doesnot exist:
(iii-a) Let Z be a set with an action byGk, ζ: Z → lim←− O×
k a Gk-equivariant
map of sets that induces asurjection from theJ-invariants in thedomain
of ζto the J-invariants in thecodomain of ζfor every closed subgroup
J ⊆ Gk that acts trivially on μ∞ ⊆ k.[ T h u s ,ζitself is necessarily
surjective.] Then there does not exist any commutative diagram of the
form
Z
λ
−→ lim←− k
⏐⏐
↓
ζ
⏐
⏐
↓
ψ
lim←− O×
k
Logk
−→ k
—w h e r eλis aGk-equivariantmap of sets, andψis the natural projection.
(iii-b) The map Logk does not admit anyfactorization
lim←−N
O×
k
λ
−→ lim←−N
k
ψ
−→ k
—w h e r eλis aGk-equivariantmap of sets, andψis the natural projection.
Indeed, since (iii-b) follows formally from (iii-a), it suﬃces to verify (iii-a). Suppose
that acommutative diagramas in (iii-a) exists. Write
·O k
def
= Ok ∩ k, O×
k
def
= O×
k ∩ k, mk
def
= mk ∩ k;
· F
def
= k(μ∞) ⊆ k.
Let x ∈ p2 ·Ok b ean o n z e r oe l e m e n t .W r i t e
· f
def
=1+ x ∈O ×
k ,( 0 ̸=) y
def
=l o gk(f) ∈ mk;
· E ⊆ k for the ﬁeld extension ofF obtained by adjoining allN-th roots
of f,f o rN ∈ N≥1,i nk.

===== PAGE 127 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 127
Thus, f lifts [via the natural projection] to an element of thecodomain of ζthat
is ﬁxed by the action of J
def
= Gal(k/E) ⊆ Gk, hence also [by our surjectivity
assumption on ζ]t oa ne l e m e n tfZ ∈ Z of the domain of ζthat is ﬁxed by the
action ofJ.S i n c eλis Gk-equivariant, we thus conclude thatλ(fZ)i sﬁxed by the
action ofJ and maps via the natural projectionψto an elementz ∈ E ⊆ k that
deﬁnes a divisible, hence l-divisible element of E×, for any prime numberl ̸= p.
On the other hand, it follows immediately from thecommutativity of thediagram
that y = z. Next, observe that since [theunit!] f is already clearlyl-divisible in
k×, hence also inF×, the Galois group Gal(E/F)i si s o m o r p h i ct oaq u o t i e n to f
Zp. But this implies that alll-power rootsof [thenon-unit!] y = z ∈ k× ⊆ F× are
contained inF,i ncontradiction to the easily veriﬁed fact that the value group of
the valued ﬁeldF is isomorphic toZ[p−1]. This completes the proof of (iii-a).
(iv) The qualitatively diﬀerent behaviorthat occurs in (i-d) and (i-e) may be
understood as being a consequence of the fact [cf. (i-a)] that whereas
(iv-a) the ring structure on O⊿
k ∪{ 0} [which makes it possible to deﬁne
the well-knownpower seriesfor thep-adic logarithmlogk] remains intact
at any particular constituent Kummer tower object[cf. the situation of
(i-d)],
(iv-b) the natural multiplicative structure on
lim←−N
k ⊇ lim←−N
O⊿
k ⊇ lim←−N
O×
k
does not admit any corresponding additive structure that gives rise
to aring structure[i.e., that would make it possible to deﬁne the well-
known power series for the logarithm, hence afactorization as in (iii-b)]
on any of the three inverse limits in the above display that iscompatible
with thenatural actionby Gk and the variousnatural projectionsto k [cf.
the situation of (i-e)].
Moreover, we observe that
(iv-c) the various natural Gk-equivariant projections of multiplicative monoids
lim←−N
k ↠ k; lim←−N
O⊿
k ↠ O⊿
k ; lim←−N
O×
k ↠ O×
k
do not admit splittings [as may be seen, for instance, by restricting such
a splitting to theroots of unity, where the existence of such a splitting
would amount, in particular, to a splitting of thenatural surjectionQp ↠
Qp/Zp].
That is to say, there isno natural wayto relate theﬁnite Kummer theoryfor asingle
constituent Kummer tower object“k”, “O⊿
k ”, “O×
k ”i nt h ecodomain of the map
Logk of (i-e) to thecorresponding proﬁnite Kummer theoryobtained by passing to
the inverse limit“lim←−N
” of the associated Kummer tower.
(v) In the context of (iv-b) [and the surrounding discussion], it is also of interest
to observe that in fact

===== PAGE 128 =====

128 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(v-a) neither of the inverse limits
Ik
def
= lim←−N
k; IO×
k
def
= lim←−N
(
O×
k ∪{ 0}
)
admits a ﬁeld structure that is stabilized by the natural action of Gk,
and whose underlyingmultiplicative structureis the natural multiplicative
structure on the inverse limit.
Indeed, suppose thatI ∈{ Ik,IO×
k
} admits such a ﬁeld structure. Letl be anodd
prime that doesnot dividethe order of theﬁnite groupof roots of unityof k.W r i t e
μl ⊆ k for the group ofl-th roots of unityof k,( μl ⊆) μl∞ ⊆ k for the group of
l-power roots of unityof k, K
def
= k(μl∞ ) ⊆ k, Gk ⊇ GK
def
= Gal(k/K), GK/k
def
=
Gk/GK, L
def
= IGK [i.e., the subﬁeld ofGK-invariants ofI]. Then our assumption
on l implies that the natural faithful action ofGK/k on μl∞ [which allows us to
think ofGK/k as aclosed subgroupof Z×
l ] induces anontrivial action ofGK/k on
μl, hence [in light of the well-known structure of the proﬁnite groupZ×
l
∼= Zl ×F×
l
for odd primesl]t h a tGK/k contains anontrivial ﬁnite closed subgroupH ⊆ GK/k.
Next, observe that the group ofdivisible elementsof the multiplicative moduleK×
is equal toμl∞ [cf. the fact thatGK/k is isomorphic to a closed subgroup ofZ×
l ;
[Tsjm], Lemma D, (iii), (iv)]. This implies that the multiplicativeGK/k-module
L× is naturally isomorphic to theGK/k-module Ml
def
= Hom(Ql/Zl,μl∞ ) ⊗Zl Ql
[where we note that as an abstract module,Ml is isomorphic to Ql], hence, in
particular, that the ﬁeldL is ofinﬁnite cardinality. On the other hand, it follows
from elementary Galois theorythat L is a ﬁnite Galois extension of the subﬁeld
LH ⊆ L of H-invariants ofL. Moreover, sinceH acts nontrivially on μl, hence also
nontrivially on Ml, we thus conclude — from the corresponding fact for the action
of nontrivial subgroups of the group of Teichm¨uller representatives [F×
l ] ⊆ Z×
l on
Ql —t h a tLH = {0,1} is a set ofcardinality two, hence that theinﬁnite ﬁeld L is
a ﬁnite ﬁeld, a contradiction. This completes the proof of (v-a). Note that
(v-b) if it was indeed the case thatIO×
k
admits atopological ﬁeldstructure as
in (v-a), then it would be possible to consider the well-knownpower series
for thelogarithm [cf. (iv-a), (iv-b)].
Of course, it follows from (v-a) that such a topological ﬁeld structure doesnot exist.
In particular, the content of (v-a) may be understood as pointing roughly in the
same direction as (iii-a), (iii-b), (iv-a), (iv-b).
(vi) Thus, in summary,
(vi-a) the fundamental dichotomy, in the context of thep-adic logarithm,
between
· [ﬁnitely] truncated Kummer theory[as in (i-d)] and
· proﬁnite Kummer theory[as in (i-e)]
may be understood in terms of theexistence [cf. the “k”i nt h edomain
of logk in (i-d)] versusnon-existence [cf. the “correspondence”(Z,ζ,λ)
of (iii-a)] of

===== PAGE 129 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 129
a single uniﬁed basepoint
for the Kummer theories in the domain/codomain of logk or Logk, i.e., a
single setequipped with an action byGk that is “suﬃciently rich” as to
admitsubquotients[i.e., where we think ofλas in (iii-a) as beingsurjective]
that correspond to theKummer theoriesin thedomain/codomainof logk
or Logk.
That is to say,
(vi-b) in the case of proﬁnite Kummer theory,t h enon-existence of such a
single uniﬁed basepointmeans that one must treat theKummer theories
in thedomain/codomainof Logk — i.e., at a more concrete level, the sets
Ik or IO×
k
equipped with their natural multiplicative structures, proﬁnite
cyclotomes, andGk-actions — as beingindependent of one another.
In particular, it follows, essentially formally, from (vi-b) that
(vi-c) one must think of the copies of “Gk” that appear in theKummer theories
in thedomain/codomainof thep-adic logarithm — which may in fact arise
as quotients of copies of sometopological groupΠ in the domain/codomain
of thep-adic logarithm — as being related to one another
not as groups of automorphisms of the various monoids that
appear in the Kummer theories in the domain/codomain of the
p-adic logarithm, but rather asabstract topological groups,
i.e., which may be related to one another only by means of some
indeterminate isomorphismof topological groups Π
∼
→ Π
— cf. the discussion preceding Example 3.8.1, as well as the discus-
sion following Example 3.8.4, concerning the necessity of working, in the
context of the log- and Θ-links, withabstract topological groups,t h a ti s
to say, as opposed to groups of ring/ﬁeld automorphisms, i.e., “Galois
groups/arithmetic fundamental groups”.
Here, we observe that theisomorphism indeterminacydiscussed in (vi-c) includes,
in particular,inner automorphismsof Π. Thischain of observations(vi-a), (vi-b),
(vi-c) forms thestarting pointof the discussion of Example 3.8.4 below.
Example 3.8.4: Symmetrizing isomorphisms, truncatibility, and thelog-
Kummer- correspondence. We maintain the notation of Examples 3.8.2, 3.8.3.
Also, we shall write “Out(−)” for the group of outer automorphisms [i.e., arbi-
trary automorphisms considered up to inner automorphisms] of a topological group
“(−)”.
(i) In the following discussion, we consider the issue ofcompatibilitybetween
· the varioussymmetrizing isomorphismsarising from the action of the
F⋇
l - and F⋊±
l -symmetries on [“abstract”] copies of the pairGk ↷ O⊿
k
[cf. the discussion of Examples 3.8.2, 3.8.3; the theory of [IUTchI],§4, §5,
§6; [Alien], §3.3, (v); [Alien],§3.6, (i), (ii), (iii)] and

===== PAGE 130 =====

130 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
· the log-Kummer-correspondence
... → •→•→• → ...
... ↘↓↙ ...
◦
[cf. [IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11, (ii)]
for the three types of Kummer theory, namely,
(i-a) the Kummer theory for [“abstract”] copies of the pairGk ↷ O⊿
k ,w h i c hi s
based on the classical theory ofBrauer groups/local class ﬁeld theory
for p-adic local ﬁelds [cf. [Alien],§3.4, (v)];
(i-b) the Kummer theory surrounding theta functions and theta values
[cf. [Alien], §3.4, (iii), (iv); [Alien],§3.6, (ii)];
(i-c) the Kummer theory surrounding κ-coric functions and copies of the
number ﬁeld Fmod [cf. the discussion of Example 3.8.2; [IUTchI], Deﬁ-
nition 3.1, (b); [Alien],§3.4, (ii); [Alien],§3.6, (iii)]]
that appear in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory [cf., e.g., [Alien], Fig. 3.10]. Be-
fore proceeding, we recall that the symmetrizing isomorphisms arising from the
action of theF⋇
l - and F⋊±
l -symmetries on [“abstract”] copies of the pairGk ↷ O⊿
k
diﬀerin that
· whereasthesymmetrizingisomorphismsarisingfromthe F⋊±
l -symmetries
are free of inner automorphism indeterminacies and hence give rise to
conjugate synchronizations,
· the symmetrizing isomorphisms arising from theF⋇
l -symmetries neces-
sarily involveinner automorphism indeterminacies
[cf. the discussion of Example 3.8.2]. On the other hand, it follows immediately —
i.e., by considering the symmetrizing isomorphisms induced by arbitrary elements
of Aut(XK)
∼
→ Out(ΠXK ) [cf. the notation of [IUTchI], Deﬁnition 3.1, (d); [Alien],
§3.3, (v)] — that
if oneforgets about the issue ofconjugate synchronizationand just thinks
in terms ofarbitrary [indeterminate] isomorphismsbetween [“abstract”]
copies of the pairGk ↷ O⊿
k , then thesymmetrizing isomorphismsarising
from the action of theF⋇
l - and F⋊±
l -symmetries on [“abstract”] copies of
the pairGk ↷ O⊿
k in factcoincide.
( i i )I nt h ec a s eo ft h eKummer theoryof (i-a),
(ii-a) compatibility between the F⋊±
l -symmetrizing isomorphisms —
i.e., without conjugacy indeterminacies! [cf. the ﬁnal portion of (i)] —
and theKummer theories of (i-a) in thedomain/codomain of the log-
link then follows formally by applyingtransport of structurevia theF⋊±
l -
symmetriestothe truncated Kummer theoriesinthedomain/codomain

===== PAGE 131 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 131
of the log-link, computed relative to thesingle uniﬁed basepoint dis-
cussed in Example 3.8.3, (i-d), (vi-a), at eachevaluation label“t ∈ Fl”
[cf. the discussion of [IUTchIII], Remark 2.3.3, (viii); [Alien],§3.6, (ii)]. Here, we
recall that
(ii-b) this compatibilityis necessary to deﬁne thediagonal “0/ ≻ /> ” — i.e.,
with respect to theevaluation labels “t ∈ Fl”— local datathat is used
to construct thelocal unit group[i.e., “O×μ” ]p o r t i o no ft h egluing data
that appears in the Θ-link
[cf. [IUTchIII], Theorem 1.5, (iii); [IUTchIII], Remark 1.5.1, (i); [Alien],§3.6, (ii)].
In this context, it is important to recall that
(ii-c) this local unit groupportion of the Θ-link gluing datasatisﬁes the crucial
property of beingindependent of theevaluation labels“t ∈ Fl”—w h i c h
are only well-deﬁnedinternallywithin aparticular (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge the-
ater! — hence allows one to construct thecontainers [that is to say, in
the form oftensor-packets of log-shells] that appear in themultiradial
representation of the Θ-pilot, i.e., the containers that make it possible
to represent the Θ-pilot in thedomain (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theater of the
Θ-link in terms of“external”data arising from thecodomain (Θ±ellNF-
)Hodge theaterof the Θ-link.
Put another way,
(ii-d) if it were the case that thecontainers of (ii-c) could only be constructed
from the domain (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theater of the Θ-link in a way that
involves independent conjugacy indeterminacies
· at thedistinct evaluation labels“t ∈ Fl” [cf. (ii-b), (ii-c)] or
· in thedomain/codomainof the log-link [cf. (ii-a)]
— i.e., all of which are only well-deﬁnedinternally within the domain
(Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theaterof the Θ-link! — then it would follow that these
containerscannotbe constructed in a way that is well-deﬁnedexternally
to thedomain (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theaterof the Θ-link, e.g., in terms of data
arising from thecodomain (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theaterof the Θ-link.
In particular, we observe that the truncatibility of the Kummer theory of (i-
a) plays afundamental rolein the logical structure of inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory.
(iii) The discussion of (ii-b), (ii-c), (ii-d) centers on the issue of synchro-
nizing the conjugacy indeterminacies at the diagonal label “≻ /> ”i nt h edo-
main/codomain of the log-link. This focus of attention on the diagonal label thus
prompts the following question:
(iii-a) If one is only interested insynchronizing the conjugacy indeterminaciesat
the diagonal label“≻ /> ”i nt h edomain/codomainof thelog-link,t h e n
why does it not suﬃce to relate theproﬁnite [i.e., rather thantruncated!]
versions of theKummer theory of (i-a) for thediagonal label“≻ /> ”
in thedomain/codomainof the log-link via asingle [i.e., corresponding to
the “single”diagonal label] indeterminate isomorphism “Π
∼
→ Π” as in
Example 3.8.3, (vi-c)?

===== PAGE 132 =====

132 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
In fact, however, the approach described in (iii-a) isnot suﬃcientfor the following
reason:
(iii-b) Ultimately, in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, one is interested in con-
structing themultiradial representationof the Θ-pilot [cf. [IUTchIII],
Theorem 3.11] — which involves thetheta values
“qj2
v
”
at v ∈ Vbad — i.e., whose construction depends, in an essential way, on
the use of[global] independentlabels “t ∈ Fl” [cf. (ii-d)] at which the
conjugacy indeterminaciesare neverthelesssynchronized relative to
a single basepoint arising from the global additive symmetry portion
“D⊚±”o ft h e( Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theater under consideration [cf. [IUTchI],
Deﬁnition 6.1, (v); [IUTchII], Corollary 4.5, (iii), (iv); [IUTchII], Corollary
4.6, (iii), (iv)].
That is to say,
(iii-c) the requirements discussed in (iii-b) are satisﬁed by the approach that is
actually taken in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory [cf. (ii-a); [IUTchIII],
Proposition 1.3, (i); [IUTchIII], Remark 1.3.2], i.e., ofsynchronizing the
conjugacy indeterminaciesin thedomain/codomainof thelog-link locally
“label by label”, for the various labels “t ∈ Fl” [cf. (ii-d)], so that arbitrary
conjugacy indeterminacy synchronizations in thedomain of the log-link
are reﬂected faithfully in thecodomainof the log-link.
On the other hand,
(iii-d) the approach discussed in (iii-c) can be implemented precisely because
of the existence of the canonicalsingle uniﬁed basepoints for thedo-
main/codomain of the log-link discussed in Example 3.8.3, (vi-a), i.e.,
which are available only in the case oftruncated Kummer theory,
since theproﬁnite Kummer theory conjugacy indeterminaciesof Example
3.8.3, (vi-c), would give rise [in the situation of the approach discussed
in (iii-c)] toindependent conjugacy indeterminaciesat the various labels
“t ∈ Fl”.
Thus, in summary, the discussion of the present (iii) sheds further light on the
fundamental role played by thetruncatibility of the Kummer theory of (i-a) in
the logical structure of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory.
( i v )I nt h ec a s eo ft h eKummer theory/Galois evaluationof (i-c), let us ﬁrst
recall from the discussion of [IUTchIII], Remark 2.3.3, (vi), (vii) [cf. also [Alien],
§3.4, (ii)] that
(iv-a) the fact that thesubmonoid
Iord ⊆ N ×{ ±1}
generated by the set oforders of thezeroes/poles [considered assigned
elements of N ×{ ±1}]o ft h erational functions that appear in (i-c)
contains — i.e., unlike the case with thetheta functionsthat appear in

===== PAGE 133 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 133
(i-b)! — elements̸∈{ ±1},a sw e l la se l e m e n t s̸∈ N, means that thecyclo-
tomic rigidity isomorphismsobtained in (i-c) may only be constructed
in a fashion consistent with theanabelian reconstruction algorithms
of [AbsTopIII], Theorem 1.9 [cf. also [IUTchI], Remark 3.1.2, (ii), (iii)] if
one constructs thesecyclotomic rigidity isomorphisms
· via proﬁnite Kummer theory[i.e., by applying the fact that
Q>0 ∩ ˆZ× = {1}]a n d
· up to anindeterminacy given by multiplication by elements
of the imageIord
± = {±1} of the projectionIord ↠ {±1} to the
second factor.
— i.e., in particular, relative to the constraints discussed in Example
3.8.3, (vi-b), (vi-c).
That is to say, it follows from the discussion of Example 3.8.3, (vi-b), (vi-c) — cf.
also
· the splitting/decoupling of theunit groupportion from thepseudo-
monoid of κ-coric rational functions[as discussed in [IUTchI], Example
5.1, (v); [Alien],§3.4, (ii)];
· the non-interferenceproperties satisﬁed by the Frobenius-like copies of
F×
mod in thedomain/codomain of the log-link [as discussed in [IUTchIII],
Proposition 3.10, (ii); [Alien],§3.7, (i)]
—t h a t
(iv-b) the Kummer theories/Galois evaluation operationsof (i-c) in the do-
main/codomainof the log-link
· involve [pseudo-]monoids that must be treated indepen-
dently of one another, hence, in particular,
· maybe related to one another only up toindeterminaciesthat
involve indeterminate isomorphismsbetween corresponding Ga-
loisgroups/arithmeticfundamentalgroupsinthe domain/codomain
of the log-link
[cf., especially, the discussion of the ﬁnal portion of Example 3.8.3, (vi)].
On the other hand,
(iv-c) the compatibility between theF⋇
l -symmetrizing isomorphisms—
i.e., with conjugacy indeterminacies! [cf. the discussion of the ﬁnal portion
of (i)] — and theKummer theories/Galois evaluation operationsof
(i-c) in thedomain/codomainof the log-link follows formally by applying
transport of structurevia theF⋇
l -symmetries to theproﬁnite Kummer
theoriesof (i-c) in the domain/codomain of thelog-link, together with the
compatibilityof thelog-link with theseF⋇
l -symmetrizing isomorphisms[cf.
[IUTchIII], Proposition 1.3, (i), (ii); [IUTchIII], Remark 1.3.3, (ii)].
As a result of the variousindeterminacies of (iv-b), (iv-c),
(iv-d) in the case of theKummer theories/Galois evaluation operationsof (i-
c), the onlydiagonal “0/ ≻ /> ” — i.e., with respect to theevaluation

===== PAGE 134 =====

134 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
labels “j ∈ F⋇
l ”— number ﬁeld inside the algebraic closureF that is
well-deﬁned externally to the domain (Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theater of the
Θ-link [cf. the discussion of themultiradial representationin (ii-c), (ii-d)]
is Fmod [cf. [Alien], §3.6, (iii)].
Here, we observe that
(iv-e) the Iord
± -indeterminacies of (iv-a) may besynchronized
· relative to the F⋇
l -symmetry by applying the “linear dis-
jointness”of the theory ofκ-coric functions fromSL2(Fl)[ c f .
the second display of [Alien],§3.6, (iii)];
· relative to the distinctvaluations v ∈ V in local-global com-
parisonsof theKummer theories/Galois evaluation operationsof
(i-c) by means of comparison with thecyclotomic rigidity iso-
morphisms arising from theKummer theories of (i-a)[i.e., which
are not subjectto Iord
± -indeterminacies]
[cf. the discussion of the ﬁnal portion of [IUTchIII], Remark 2.3.3, (vi)],
but
· not relative to thedomain/codomainof the log-link since the
relevant[Frobenius-like] monoidsin the domain/codomain of the
log-link are not set-theoretically related to one another via the
log-link
[cf. (iv-b)].
In particular, we note that onefundamental aspectof the Kummer theory/Galois
evaluation of (i-c) that underlies thecompatibility and synchronization properties
of (iv-c), (iv-e) is theF⋇
l -symmetricity of the Kummer theory/Galois evaluation
of (i-c) [cf. the discussion of [IUTchII], Remark 1.1.1, (v); the ﬁrst display of
[IUTchIII], Remark 2.3.3, (iii); the discussion of [Alien],§3.6, (iii)].
(v) The Kummer theory/Galois evaluation of (i-b), which doesnot satisfy
the condition ofF⋊±
l -symmetricity, exhibitsqualitatively fundamentally diﬀerent
behavior from theF⋇
l -symmetric Kummer theory/Galois evaluation of (i-c) [cf. the
discussion of [IUTchII], Remark 1.1.1, (v); the ﬁrst display of [IUTchIII], Remark
2.3.3, (iii)]. If, for instance,
(v-a) one attempts to apply the approach viaproﬁnite Kummer theory
of (iv-b), (iv-c) to the task of verifying some sort ofcompatibility be-
tween theF⋊±
l -symmetrizing isomorphisms — i.e., withconjugacy
indeterminacies arising fromlog-link domain/codomain comparisons,a s
discussed in Example 3.8.3, (vi-b), (vi-c) [cf. also the discussion of (i), (ii),
(iii), especially (iii-d), of the present Example 3.8.4]! — and theKummer
theories/Galois evaluation operationsof (i-b) in thedomain/codomain of
the log-link,
then one encounters the following situation:
(v-b) Inorderto compare, viatheF⋊±
l -symmetry, theKummertheories/Galois
evaluation operations at diﬀerentt ∈ Fl [i.e., for distinct theta values

===== PAGE 135 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 135
“qj2
v
”, wherev ∈ Vbad], it is necessary to establish a(n) —a priori self-
contradictory!— situation in which the F⋊±
l -symmetry permutes the
labels “t ∈ Fl”i nanontrivial fashion, but actstrivially on the [non-
F⋊±
l -symmetric!] ´etale theta function!
Here, we recall [cf. the theory of [IUTchII],§2] that
(v-c) in the context of Galois evaluation, the ´etale theta function may be
thought of as a cohomology class
∈ H1
(
some closed subgroup
of Πv
, some cyclotome associated to the
Galois evaluation labelt ∈ Fl
)
— that is to say, where [cf. (v-b)!] theF⋊±
l -symmetry is toact nontriv-
ially on theGalois evaluation cyclotome[i.e., thesecondargument of
“H1(−)”], buttrivially on the closed subgroup of Πv [i.e., the ﬁrst
argument of “H1(−)”]!
Before proceeding, it is also of interest to recall that
(v-d) a proﬁnite Kummer theorysituation of the sort discussed in (v-a), (v-b),
(v-c) occurs, for instance, if one replaces the theta functions that occur in
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory by theirN-th powers,w h e r eN is an
integer ≥ 2 [cf. the discussion of [IUTchIII], Remark 2.3.3, (vi), (vii)].
Now returning to the discussion of (v-b), (v-c), we observe that
(v-e) it is essentially a tautology that the only “solution”to the [a priori]
self-contradictory simultaneous “trivial/nontrivial action” condi-
tion “(SimCon)”of (v-b), (v-c) lies in working with objects that are
invariant with respect to theF⋊±
l -symmetry, i.e., at a more concrete
level, with a
single uniﬁed set-theoretic basepoint
— which allows one to compute the variousF⋊±
l -symmetrizing isomor-
phisms by projecting to the single copy of “Gv” determined by the base-
point.
On the other hand,
(v-f) the existence of theconjugacy indeterminaciesinherent in theproﬁ-
nite Kummer theoryF⋊±
l -symmetrizing isomorphismsof (v-a) means that
any “single uniﬁed basepoint”as in (v-e) is well-deﬁned only up toconju-
gacy indeterminacies— a situation that isunacceptablein inter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory since it would mean that thecoeﬃcient cyclotomesin
(v-c) are well-deﬁned only up to certainˆZ×-multiples, i.e., that the´etale
theta functions and theta values [i.e., “qj2
v
”, wherev ∈ Vbad]i nt h e
theory are well-deﬁned only up to certainˆZ×-powers [cf. the discussion
of [IUTchIII], Remark 2.1.1, (v)]!
That is to say,

===== PAGE 136 =====

136 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(v-g) the only way to avoid the pathologies of (v-f) is toreplacethe proﬁnite
Kummer theory in the discussion of (v-a), (v-b), (v-c), (v-e), (v-f) by the
truncated Kummer theoryof (i-b) [cf. the discussion of the ﬁnal por-
tion of [Alien],§3.6, (ii)], so that we can apply thesingle uniﬁed basepoint
of Example 3.8.3, (i-d), (vi-a) [cf. also the discussion of (ii) in the present
Example 3.8.4] to obtain a
single uniﬁed set-theoretic basepoint
as in (v-e), but which is well-deﬁned up to geometric fundamental
group conjugacy indeterminacies [i.e., indeterminacies arising from
conjugation by elements of the geometric fundametric fundamental groups
involved], which are, at any rate, inherent in theF⋊±
l -symmetrizing iso-
morphisms and, moreover, [unlike the situation discussed in (v-f)!] do
not have any eﬀecton the computation of theseF⋊±
l -symmetrizing iso-
morphisms by projecting to the single copy of “Gv” determined by the
basepoint
— cf. [IUTchII], Remark 1.1.1, (iv), (v); [IUTchII], Remark 2.6.1, (i), (ii). Before
proceeding, it is interesting to observe that
(v-h) the “tautological resolution”of the [a priori] self-contradictorysimul-
taneity condition (SimCon) discussed in (v-e), (v-g) by considering
“invariants”— i.e., in the situation of (v-e), (v-g), asingle uniﬁed set-
theoretic basepoint—i s formally highly reminiscent of the “tautological
resolution”of the log-shifts in the left- and right-hand columns of the
“inﬁnite H”of (InfH) by means of the construction ofinvariants[cf. the
discussion surrounding (logORInd), (Di/NDi) in§3.11 below; the discus-
sion of (Stp7) in§3.10 below].
Thus, in summary, thetruncatibility of the Kummer theory/Galois evaluation
operationsof (i-b) [cf. the discussion of [IUTchIII], Remark 2.3.3, (vi), (vii), (viii);
theﬁnalportionof[Alien], §3.6, (ii)]playsa fundamental roleinthelogicalstructure
of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory [cf. the discussion of Example 3.3.2, (vii)].
(vi) Recall that thesingle uniﬁed basepoint of (v-g) is completely deter-
mined by theconnected subgraph “Γ▶
X ⊆ ΓX”, or, equivalently, the connected
subgraph “Γ▶
¨Y ⊆ Γ¨Y ” [cf. [IUTchII], Remark 2.6.1, (i), (ii); [IUTchII], Remark
2.6.3, (i)]. Here, we recall further from [IUTchII], Remark 2.6.3, (i), that ΓX or Γ¨Y
may be thought of as a“copy Γof the real lineR”, in which the integersZ ⊆ R
are taken to be thevertices, and the line segments joining the integers are taken
to be theedges. In light of thecentral roleplayed by thesingled uniﬁed basepoint
of (v-g) in the discussion of (v) — and indeed in theentire logical structure
of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory! — it is of interest to recall from the discus-
sion of [IUTchII], Remark 2.6.3, that thissubgraph “Γ▶” is [essentially]uniquely
determined by various natural conditions, which must be satisﬁed in order for
the theory to operate in the desired fashion. Indeed, let us ﬁrst recall from the
discussion of [IUTchII], Remark 2.5.2, (i), (ii), (iii), (iv); [IUTchII], Remark 2.6.3,
(ii), that
(vi-a) the various geometric fundamental groups“Δ” that appear act on the
various vertices t ∈{ − l⋇,..., −1,0,1,...,l ⋇}⊆ Γindependently

===== PAGE 137 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 137
— where we recall thatl⋇ = l−1
2 ,a n dt h a t
(vi-b) the actions referred to in (vi-a) of geometric fundamental groups“Δ”
on the “copy Γof the real lineR”amount to the conventional action of
GΓ
def
= l ·Z⋊ {±1} [i.e., the group generated bytranslations by elements
of l ·Z and multiplication by −1] on the real lineR.
Write Γ▶
Z
def
=Γ▶ ∩ Z; ±Γ▶
Z
def
=Γ ▶
Z ∪− Γ▶
Z ⊆ R. Next, recall that
(vi-c) since the vertex 0 ∈ Γi st h eunique vertex in Γ that may be used to
deﬁne the crucial splittings of theta monoids discussed in [IUTchII],
Corollary 2.6, (ii), it is necessary that 0∈ Γ▶
Z [cf. [IUTchII], Remark 2.6.3,
(i)].
On the other hand, (vi-c), together with the existence of the independent GΓ-
indeterminacies of (vi-a), (vi-b), imply that
(vi-d) if Γ▶ contains aconnected componentΓ▶
∗ that isnot contained inl ·Z (⊆
Γ), then anytheta value
qj2
v
obtained viaGalois evaluationfor j ∈ Γ▶
∗ ∩ Z ⊆ Γ, iswell-deﬁned only
up to aGΓ-indeterminacy, i.e., up to apossible confusionbetween j and
GΓ-translates j′ of j.
(vi-e) any theta value
qj2
v
obtained via Galois evaluation for j ∈ Γ▶
Z ,i s well-deﬁned only up to
a GΓ-indeterminacy withinΓ▶
Z , i.e., up to apossible confusionbetween j
and GΓ-translates j′ of j that lie inside Γ▶
Z .
Here, it is important to recall [cf. [IUTchI], Remark 3.5.1, (ii); [IUTchII], Remark
2.6.3, (iv); [IUTchII], Corollary 4.5, (v); [IUTchII], Corollary 4.6, (v)] that
(vi-f) any indeterminacies concerning “j”, “j′”of the sort described in (vi-d),
(vi-e) for nonzeroj,j′ ∈ Z with distinct absolute values would result in
indeterminacies in the“ v e c t o ro fr a t i o s ”[cf. [IUTchII], Corollary 4.5, (v)]
that determines the structure of theglobal realiﬁed Gaussian Frobenioids,
i.e., would result inviolations of theglobal product formularelating
the value groups at diﬀerentv ∈ V.
In particular, (vi-c), (vi-d), (vi-e), (vi-f) imply that
(vi-g) the natural map
±Γ▶
Z /{±1}→ Z/GΓ
— i.e., from the set of{±1}-orbits of ±Γ▶
Z to the set ofGΓ-orbits inZ —
is injective [cf. [IUTchII], Remark 2.6.3, (ii)];
(vi-h) the subgraph Γ▶ ⊆ Γi sconnected [cf. [IUTchII], Remark 2.6.3, (i)].
Now one veriﬁes immediately that (vi-c), (vi-g), (vi-h) implyformally that
(vi-i) Γ▶ ⊆ Γi saconnected subgraphthat contains 0 and iscontained in
the closed interval [−l⋇,l⋇].

===== PAGE 138 =====

138 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Next, we observe that, in light of (vi-e), (vi-i),
(vi-j) replacing Γ▶
Z by ±Γ▶
Z does not have any eﬀect on the validity of (vi-i) or
on the way in which the subgraph Γ▶
Z is used in inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory; in particular, we mayassume, without loss of generality, that the
symmetry condition Γ▶
Z = ±Γ▶
Z holds.
On the other hand,
(vi-k) the estimates that areultimately obtained in inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory [cf. [IUTchIII], Corollary 3.12; [IUTchIV], Theorem 1.10] areop-
timized precisely when theaverage of thesquares j2 of the nonzero ele-
ments j ∈ Γ▶
Z = ±Γ▶
Z is maximized [cf. [IUTchII], Remark 2.6.3, (ii)],
i.e., when Γ▶ = ±Γ▶
Z is given precisely by theclosed interval[−l⋇,l⋇]
[which implies that thenatural mapof (vi-g) isbijective].
That is to say, in summary, when subject to thesymmetry condition Γ▶
Z = ±Γ▶
Z
of (vi-j) and theoptimization condition of (vi-k), the subgraph Γ▶ ⊆ Γ is in fact
uniquely determined[cf. [IUTchII], Remark 2.6.3, (v)].
Unlike the situations considered in [SGA1] [cf. the discussion of Example
3.8.1], in which the ring/scheme structures of the various distinct schemes that
appear arecoric,t h ering structuresof the rings that appear on either side of the
log- and Θ-links of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory — i.e., such as number ﬁelds
or completions of number ﬁelds at various valuations — arenot coricwith respect
to the respective links. This leads one naturally to considerweaker structures
[cf. the discussion of Example 3.2.2, (i), (ii), (iv)] the discussion of Example 3.8.2,
(iii), (iv); the discussion of Example 3.8.3, (vi)] such as
· abstract topological groups, in the case of theproﬁnite Kummer theories
in thedomain/codomainof the log-link,o r
· sets equipped with a topology and a continuous action of atopological
group, in the case of thelog-link,o r
· realiﬁed Frobenioids[in the sense of [IUTchIII], Theorem 1.5, (v)] or
topological monoids equipped with a continuous action of a topological
group, in the case of the Θ-link,
which are indeed coric with respect to the respective links. Indeed, it is pre-
cisely this sort of consideration — i.e., ofweaker coric structuresto relate theuni-
verses/Galois categories/´etale fundamental groupsassociated to ring/scheme struc-
tures on opposite sides of the links under consideration [cf. the discussion preceding
Example 3.8.1] — that gave rise to the term“inter-universal”.
Here, we note that it is of fundamental importance that thesetopological groups
[which typically in fact arise asGalois groups or arithmetic fundamental groups
of schemes] be treated asabstract topological groups, rather than as Galois
groups or arithmetic fundamental groups [cf. the discussion at the beginning of
§3.2; the discussion of Example 3.8.2, (iii), (iv); the discussion of Example 3.8.3,
(vi)]. That is to say, to treat these topological groups as Galois groups or arithmetic
fundamental groups requires the use of thering/scheme structuresinvolved, i.e.,
the use of structures which arenot availablesince they arenot common/coricto

===== PAGE 139 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 139
therings/schemesthatappearon opposite sidesofthe log-/Θ-link[cf. thediscussion
of [Alien], §2.10; [IUTchIII], Remarks 1.1.2, 1.2.4, 1.2.5; [IUTchIV], Remarks 3.6.1,
3.6.2, 3.6.3]. In this context, it is also of fundamental importance to observe that it
is precisely because these topological groups must be treated asabstract topological
groups that anabelian results play a central role in inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory.
One consequence of the constraint [discussed above] that one must typically
work, in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, with structures that are substantially
weaker than ring structures is the necessity, in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory,
of allowing for variousindeterminacies, such as (Ind1), (Ind2), (Ind3), that are
somewhat more involved than the relatively simple inner automorphism indetermi-
nacies that occur in [SGA1]. Here, we recall that from the discussion of (∧(∨)-Chn)
in §3.7 that
it is precisely thenumerous indeterminaciesthat arise in inter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory that give rise to the numerouslogical OR relations
“ ∨”in the display of (∧(∨)-Chn).
On the other hand, once one takes such indeterminacies into account, i.e.,
once one consents to work with various objects “up to certain suitable
indeterminacies” — e.g., by means ofpoly-morphisms, as discussed in
§3.7 — it is natural toidentify, by applying(ExtInd2) [as discussed in
§3.6], objects that are related to one another by means of collections of
isomorphisms [i.e., poly-isomorphisms] that are uniquely determined up
to suitable indeterminacies.
Here, we observe that this sort of(ExtInd2) identiﬁcation that occurs re-
peatedly in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory [cf. the discussion of §3.6] may at
ﬁrst glance appear somewhat novel. In fact, however, from the point of view of
mathematical foundations— i.e., just as in the discussion ofinter-universality given
above! — this sort of (ExtInd2) identiﬁcation is qualitatively very similar tonu-
merous classical constructionssuch as the following:
(AlgCl) the notion of an algebraic closure of a ﬁeld [cf. the discussion of
Example 3.8.1], which isnot constrainedto be aspeciﬁc set constructed
from the ﬁeld;
(DrInv) various categorical constructions such asdirect and inverse limits[i.e.,
such asﬁber productsof schemes] that are deﬁned by means of some sort of
universal property,a n dw h i c ha r enot constrainedto bespeciﬁc setseven
when the given direct or inverse systems are speciﬁed set-theoretically;
(HomRs) various constructions of (co)homology modules in homological al-
gebra that depend on the use ofresolutions that satisfy certain abstract
properties, but which are not constrained in a strict set-theoretic sense
even if the original objects resolved by such resolutions are speciﬁed set-
theoretically.
That is to say, in each of theclassical constructions,t h e“output object”is, strictly
speaking, from the point of view of mathematical foundations,not well-deﬁned as
a particular set, but rather as acollection of sets[where we note that, typically,

===== PAGE 140 =====

140 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
this “collection” isnot a set!] that are related to one another — and hence, in
common practice, identiﬁed with one another, in the fashion of (ExtInd2)! —
via unique [modulo, say, some sort of well-deﬁned indeterminacy]isomorphisms by
means of some sort of“universal” property.
In this context, it is also important to note that, from a foundational point of
view, the sort of“(sub)quotient”obtained by applying (ExtInd2) [cf. the discussion
of “(sub)quotients”in (sQLTL) and indeed throughout§3.6] must be regarded,a
priori,a sa formal (sub)quotient, i.e., as some sort ofdiagram of arrows.T h a t
is to say, at least from ana prioripoint of view,
(NSsQ) any explicit construction of a“naive set-theoretic (sub)quotient”
necessarily requires the use of some sort ofset-theoretic enumeration
of each of the individual [set-theoretic] objects that are identiﬁed, up to
isomorphism, via an application of (ExtInd2). On the other hand, as
is well-known, typically such set-theoretic enumerations — which often
reduce, roughly speaking, to consideration of the“set of all sets”!—l e a d
immediately to acontradiction.
Indeed, it is precisely this aspect of the constructions of inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory that motivated the author to include the discussion ofspecies in [IUTchIV],
§3.
Finally, we recall — cf. also the discussion of§3.10 [especially, (Stp7)] below
—t h a t
(LVsQ) it is only in theﬁnal portion of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, i.e.,
once one obtains aformal (sub)quotientthat forms a“closed loop”,t h a t
one may pass from this formal (sub)quotient to a “coarse/set-theoretic
(sub)quotient”by taking thelog-volume
[cf. the discussion of [Alien],§3.11, (v); [IUTchIII], Remark 3.9.5, (ix); Steps (x),
(xi) of the proof of [IUTchIII], Corollary 3.12].
§3.9. Passage and descent to underlying structures
One fundamental aspect of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory lies in the use of
numerous functorial algorithmsthat consist of the construction
input data ⇝ output data
of certainoutput dataassociated to giveninput data. When one applies such func-
torial algorithms, there are two ways in which the output data may be treated
[cf. [Alien], §2.7, (iii); the discussion of“post-anabelian structures”in [IUTchII],
Remark 1.11.3, (iii), (v); [IUTchIII], Remark 1.2.2, (vii)] :
(UdOut) Onemayconsiderthe output dataindependentlyofthegiven input data
and functorial algorithmsused to construct the output data. In this case,
the output data may be regarded as a sort of“underlying structure”
associated to the input data.

===== PAGE 141 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 141
(InOut) One may consider theoutput dataas dataequipped with the additional
structure constituted by theinput data, together with thefunctorial algo-
rithm that gave rise to the output data by applying the algorithm to the
input data.
Typical examples of this phenomenon in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory are the
following [cf. the notational conventions of [IUTchI], Deﬁnition 3.1, (e), (f)]:
(sQGOut) Functorial algorithms that associate toΠv [where v ∈ Vnon]s o m esub-
quotient group of Πv, such as, for instance, the quotient Πv ↠ Gv:
In this sort of situation, treatment of the output data [i.e., subquotient
group of Πv] according to (InOut) is indicated by a “(Πv)” following the
notation for the particular subquotient under consideration; by contrast,
treatment of the output data [i.e., subquotient group of Πv] according to
(UdOut) is indicated by theomission of this “(Πv)”.
(MnOut) Functorial algorithms that associate toΠv [where v ∈ Vnon] some sort of
[abelian] monoid equipped with a continuous action byΠv, such as, for
instance, [data isomorphic to] various subquotient monoids [i.e., “O⊿”,
“O×”, “O×μ”, etc.] of the multiplicative monoid F
×
v : In this sort of
situation, treatment of the output data [i.e., monoid equipped with an
action by Πv] according to (InOut) is indicated by a “(Πv)” following the
notation for the particular monoid equipped with an action by Πv under
consideration; by contrast, treatment of the output data [i.e., monoid
equipped with an action by Πv] according to (UdOut) is indicated by the
omission of this “(Πv)”.
(PSOut) Functorial algorithms that associate some sort ofprime-strip to some
sort of input data: In this sort of situation, treatment of the output data
[i.e., some sort of prime-strip] according to (InOut) is indicated by a “(−)”
[where“ −”isthegiven input data]followingthenotationfortheparticular
prime-strip under consideration; by contrast, treatment of the output data
[i.e., some sort of prime-strip] according to (UdOut) is indicated by the
omission of this “(−)”.
Perhaps the most central example of (PSOut) in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory
is the notion of the “ q-/Θ-intertwinings”on an F⊩▶×μ-prime-strip [cf. the
discussion of [Alien], §3.11, (v); [IUTchIII], Remark 3.9.5, (viii), (ix); [IUTchIII],
Remark 3.12.2, (ii)]:
(ItwOut) This terminology refers to the treatment of theF⊩▶×μ-prime-strip ac-
cording to (InOut), relative to the functorial algorithm for constructing
the q-pilot F⊩▶×μ-prime-strip [in the case of the “q-intertwining”] or
the Θ-pilot F⊩▶×μ-prime-strip [in the case of the “Θ-intertwining”] from
some Θ±ellNF- or D-Θ±ellNF-Hodge theater.
In any situation in which one considers a construction from the point of view
of (UdOut) — that is to say, as a construction that produces“underlying data”

===== PAGE 142 =====

142 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
[i.e., “output data”]f r o m“original data”[i.e., “input data”]
input data ⇝ output data
|| ||
original data underlying data
— it is natural to consider the issue ofdescent to [a functorial algorithm in] the
underlying dataof afunctorial algorithmin theoriginal data. Here, we say that
a functorial algorithm Φi nt h eoriginal data descends to a functorial
algorithm Ψi nt h eunderlying dataif there exists a functorial isomorphism
Φ
∼
→ Ψ|original data
between Φ and therestriction of Ψ, i.e., relative to the given construction
original data ⇝ underlying data.
That is to say, roughly speaking, to say that the functorial algorithm Φ in the
original datadescends to theunderlying datameans, in essence, that although the
construction constituted by Φ depends,a priori,o nt h e“ﬁner”original data,i n
fact, up to natural isomorphism, it only depends on the“coarser”underlying data.
One elementary example of the phenomenon ofdescent may be seen in the
situation discussed in (HomRs) in§3.8:
(HmDsc) The various constructions of(co)homology modulesin homological
algebraare, strictly speaking, constructions that require asinput datanot
just somegiven module[whose (co)homology is computed by the construc-
tion], but also some sort ofresolution of the given module that satisﬁes
certain properties. In fact, however, such constructions of (co)homology
modules typically descend,u pt ounique isomorphism, to constructions
whose input dataconsists solely of thegiven module.
Another illustrative elementary example of the phenomenon ofdescent is the fol-
lowing:
Example 3.9.1: Categories of open subschemes. Let X be a scheme, T a
topological space.W r i t e
·| X| for theunderlying topological spaceof X,
· Open(X) for the category ofopen subschemesof X and open immersions
over X,
· Open(T) for the category ofopen subsetsof T and open immersionsover
T.
Then thefunctorial algorithm
X ↦→ Open(X)
— deﬁned, say, on the category of schemes and morphisms of schemes — is eas-
ily veriﬁed to descend, relative to the constructionX ⇝ |X|,t ot h efunctorial
algorithm
T ↦→ Open(T)

===== PAGE 143 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 143
— deﬁned, say, on the category of topological spaces and continuous maps of topo-
logical spaces. That is to say, one veriﬁes immediately that there is a natural
functorial isomorphism
Open(X)
∼
→ Open(|X|)
[i.e., in this case, following the conventions employed in inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory, anatural functorial isomorphism class of equivalences of categories—c f .
the discussion of “Monoids and Categories” in [IUTchI],§0].
On the other hand, perhaps themost fundamental example, in the context of
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, of this phenomenon ofdescent is the following
[cf. the notational conventions of [IUTchI], Deﬁnition 3.1, (e), (f)]:
(MnDsc) The topological multiplicative monoiddetermined by thetopological ring
given by [the union with {0} of] O⊿(ΠX) [cf. [Alien], Example 2.12.3,
(iii)] — that is to say, a construction that,a priori, from the point of view
of [AbsTopIII], Theorem 1.9; [AbsTopIII], Corollary 1.10, is a functorial
algorithm in thetopological group
ΠX
[i.e., “Πv”, from the point of view (sQGOut)] — in factdescends [cf.
the discussion at the beginning of [Alien],§2.12; the discussion of [Alien],
Example 2.12.3, (i)], relative to passage to theunderlying quotient group
discussed in (SQGOut), to a functorial algorithm in thetopological group
Gk
[i.e., “Gv”, from the point of view (sQGOut)].
Finally, we remark that often, in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, the out-
put data of the functorial algorithm Φ of the above discussion is regarded“stack-
theoretically”. That is to say, the output data isnot a single “set-theoretic object”,
but rather a collection [which is not necessarily a set!] of set-theoretic objects
linked by uniquely determined poly-isomorphisms of some sort. Typically, this sort
of situation arises when one applies(ExtInd2) — cf. the discussion of(NSsQ) in
§3.8. The mostcentral exampleof this phenomenon in inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory is themultiradial algorithm— and, especially, the portion of the multi-
radial algorithm that involves thelog-Kummer-correspondenceand closely related
operations ofGalois evaluation— which plays the role of
exhibiting the Frobenius-likeΘ-pilot as one possibility within a collec-
tion of possibilitiesconstructed via anabelian algorithms from ´etale-like
data
[cf. the discussion at the end of§3.6, as well as the discussion of§3.10, §3.11, be-
low]. That is to say, thelog-Kummer-correspondenceand closely related operations
of Galois evaluation exhibit the Frobenius-like Θ-pilot asone possibility within a
collection of possibilitiesconstructed via anabelian algorithms from ´etale-like data

===== PAGE 144 =====

144 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
not in a set-theoretic sense [i.e., one possibility/element c o n t a i n e di naset of
possibilities], but rather in a “stack-theoretic sense”, in accordance with various
applications of (ExtInd2) [cf. the discussion at the end of§3.6], i.e., as
one possibility,u pt oisomorphism, within some [not necessarily set-
theoretic!] collection ofpossibilities.
As discussed in (LVsQ) in§3.8, one arrives at aset-theoretic situation— i.e.,one
possibility/element contained in a set of possibilities — only after one obtains a
“closed loop”, which allows one to pass to a“coarse/set-theoretic (sub)quotient”by
taking thelog-volume.
§3.10. Detailed description of the chain of logical AND relations
We begin the present§3.10 with the following well-known and, in some sense,
essentially tautological observation: Just as every form of data — i.e., ranging from
text ﬁlesand webpages to audiovisual data— that can be processed by a computer
can, ultimately, be expressed as a [perhaps very long!]chain of “0’s” and “1’s”, the
well-known functional completeness, in the sense ofpropositional calculus,o ft h e
collection ofBoolean operatorsconsisting oflogical AND “∧”, logical OR “∨”,a n d
negation “¬”motivates the point of view that one can, in principle, express
the essential logical structure of any mathematical argument or
theory in terms ofelementary logical relations, i.e., such aslogical
AND “∧”, logical OR “∨”,a n dnegation “¬”.
Indeed, it is precisely this point of view that formed thecentral motivation and
conceptual starting pointof the exposition given in the present paper.
From the point of view of the correspondence with the terminology and modes
of expression that actually appear in [IUTchI-III] and [Alien], the representation
given in the present paper of theessential logical structureof inter-universal Te-
ichm¨uller theory in terms ofelementary logical relations, i.e., such aslogical AND
“∧”and logical OR “∨”, may be understood as follows:
· Logical AND “∧”corresponds to such terms as
· simultaneous executionand
· gluing
[cf. [IUTchIII], Remark 3.11.1, (ii); [IUTchIII], Remark 3.12.2, (ii), (citw),
(fitw); the ﬁnal portion of [Alien],§3.7, (i); [Alien],§3.11, (iv)].
· Logical OR “∨”corresponds to such terms as
· indeterminacies,
· poly-morphisms,a n d
· projection/(sub)quotient/splitting
[cf. §3.7; the title of [IUTchIII]; [IUTchIII], Remark 3.9.5, (xiii), (ix);
[Alien], §3.11, (v); [Alien],§4.1, (iv)].

===== PAGE 145 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 145
Recall theessential logical structureof inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory sum-
marized in (∧(∨)-Chn)
A ∧ B = A ∧ (B1 ∨ B2 ∨ ... )
=⇒ A ∧ (B1 ∨ B2 ∨ ... ∨ B′
1 ∨ B′
2 ∨ ... )
=⇒ A ∧ (B1 ∨ B2 ∨ ... ∨ B′
1 ∨ B′
2 ∨ ... ∨ B′′
1 ∨ B′′
2 ∨ ... )
...
[cf. the discussion of §3.6, §3.7]. Observe that if the description of the various
“possibilities”related via “∨’s” in the above displays issuitably formulated, i.e.,
withoutsuperﬂuousoverlaps, theninfactthese logical OR “∨’s”maybeunderstood
as logical XOR “˙∨’s”, i.e., we conclude the following:
(∧(˙∨)-Chn) The essential logical structureof inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory may
be summarized as follows:
A ∧ B = A ∧ (B1 ˙∨ B2 ˙∨ ... )
=⇒ A ∧ (B1 ˙∨ B2 ˙∨ ... ˙∨ B′
1 ˙∨ B′
2 ˙∨ ... )
=⇒ A ∧ (B1 ˙∨ B2 ˙∨ ... ˙∨ B′
1 ˙∨ B′
2 ˙∨ ... ˙∨ B′′
1 ˙∨ B′′
2 ˙∨ ... )
...
Here, we observe the following:
(∧(˙∨)-Chn1) The “∧’s” in the above display
· arisefromtheΘ -link, whichmaybethoughtofasare-
lationship between certain portions of themultiplica-
tive structures of the ring structures arising from the
(Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theatersin the domain and codomain
of the Θ-link that arecommon [cf. “∧”!] to these ring
structures.
This situation is reminiscent of
· the fact that from the point of view ofBoolean alge-
bras,“ ∧” corresponds to themultiplicativestructure
of theﬁeld F2, which may be regarded, via the splitting
determined by Teichm¨uller representatives, as a multi-
plicative structure that iscommon [cf. “∧”!] toZ and
F2 [cf. Example 2.4.6, (iii)], as well as of
· the discussion of [Alien],§3.11, (iv), (2and), concern-
ing the interpretation of the discussion ofcrystals in
[Alien], §3.1, (v), (3KS), in terms of the logical rela-
tor “∧”, i.e., as objects that may besimultaneously
interpreted, up to isomorphism, as pull-backs via one
projection morphism and [cf. “ ∧”!] as pull-backs via
the other projection morphism.

===== PAGE 146 =====

146 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
(∧(˙∨)-Chn2) The “ ˙∨’s” in the above display may be understood as corre-
sponding to
· variousindeterminaciesthatarisemainlyfromthe log-
Kummer-correspondence, i.e., from sequences of it-
erates of the log-link, which may be thought of as a
device for constructingadditive log-shells. The addi-
tive structures of the ring structures arising from the
(Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theatersin the domain and codomain
of the Θ-link are structures which, unlike the corre-
sponding multiplicative structures, are not common
[cf. “ ˙∨”!] to these ring structures in the domain and
codomain of the Θ-link.
This situation is reminiscent of
· the fact that from the point of view ofBoolean al-
gebras,“ ˙∨” corresponds to theadditive structure of
the ﬁeld F2, which is an additive structure that isnot
shared [cf. “ ˙∨”!], relative to the splitting determined
by Teichm¨uller representatives, byZ and F2 [cf. Exam-
ple 2.4.6, (iii)], as well as of
· the discussion of [Alien],§3.11, (iv), (2and), concerning
the interpretation of the discussion ofcrystals in [Alien],
§3.1, (v), (3KS) in terms of the logical relator “∧”, i.e.,
where we recall that the two pull-backs of therank
one Hodge subbundle [cf. [Alien], §3.1, (v), (5KS);
the discussion of Hodge structures in [IUTchI],§I2] do
not, in general, coincide [cf. “ ˙∨”!], but rather diﬀer
by anadditive“deformation discrepancy”, namely, the
Kodaira-Spencer morphism.
(∧(˙∨)-Chn3) Taken together, (∧(˙∨)-Chn1) and (∧(˙∨)-Chn2) may be under-
stood as expressing the fact that the “˙∨’s” and “∧’s” of the above
display correspond, respectively, to thetwo underlying com-
binatorial dimensions — i.e., addition and multiplication
— of a ring or, alternatively, to thetwo-dimensionalnature of
the log-theta-lattice [cf. the discussion of [IUTchIII], Remark
3.12.2, (i); the latter portion of [Alien],§3.3, (ii)]. Thus, these
two dimensions may be understood, alternatively, as correspond-
ing to
· the arithmetically intertwined Θ-link and log-
link of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, which give
rise to themultiradial representationup to suitable
indeterminacies [cf. “∧(˙∨)”!] of the Θ-pilot;
· the description given in Example 2.4.6, (iii), of the
carry-additionoperationonthetruncatedringofWitt
vectors Z/4Z in terms of “∧”a n d“˙∨”[ c f .“∧(˙∨)”!];

===== PAGE 147 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 147
· the ﬁltered crystal discussed in [Alien], §3.1, (v),
(5KS), where one may think of theﬁltration [i.e., rank
oneHodgesubbundle] as “being well-deﬁnedupto inde-
terminacies”[ c f .“∧(˙∨)”!], i.e., up to a“discrepancy”,
which is given by theKodaira-Spencer morphism.
(∧(˙∨)-Chn4) The two dimensions discussed in (∧(˙∨)-Chn3) may be under-
stood as corresponding to the two dimensions — i.e.,
· the successive iterates of the Frobenius mor-
phism in positive characteristicand
· successive extensionsto mixed characteristic
—o far i n go fWitt vectors[cf. the discussion of the latter por-
tion of [Alien],§3.3, (ii)]. This relationship to the two dimensions
o far i n go fWitt vectorsis entirely consistentwith the way in
which truncated rings of Witt vectors occur in the discussion of
Example 2.4.6, (iii), i.e., with the expression
¨∨ =( ∧, ˙∨)
of mixed characteristic“carry-addition”as a sort of“inter-
twining”between addition and multiplication in the ﬁeld F2
obtained by“stacking”multiplication “∧” on top ofaddition
“˙∨”.
Moreover, in this context, we note that the various correspondences observed in
(∧(˙∨)-Chn3) and (∧(˙∨)-Chn4) are particularlyfascinating in that they assert that
the “arithmetic intertwining”in a ring betweenaddition and multiplication
— i.e., themathematical structure which is in some sense the main object of
study in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory — may be elucidated by means of a the-
ory [i.e., inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory!] whoseessential logical structure,
when written symbolically in terms ofBoolean operators such as “∧”a n d“˙∨”,
amounts precisely to the description [cf. the discussion of (¨∨= ∧ ˙∨) in Example
2.4.6, (iii)] of the“Boolean intertwining”that appears in Boolean carry-addition
“¨∨” between Boolean addition “˙∨” and Boolean multiplication “∧”. Put another
way, it is as if
(TrHrc) the arithmetic intertwining which is the main object of study in inter-
universal Teichm¨uller theory somehow“induces”/“is reﬂected in”a sort of
“structural carry operation”,o r “trans-hierarchical similitude”,
to the Boolean intertwining that constitutes the essential logical struc-
ture of the theory [i.e., inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory] that is used to
describe it:
arithmetic intertwining ⇝ Boolean intertwining!
Finally, we observe that it is also interesting to note that theessential mechanism
underlying the Kummer theory of theta functions — which plays a central

===== PAGE 148 =====

148 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
role in inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory, i.e., in inducing thetrans-hierarchical
similude discussed in (TrHrc) — namely, the correspondence
Kummer theory oftheta functions ←→ one valuation/cusp
Kummer theory ofalgebraic rational functions ←→ multiple valuations/cusps
discussed in [IUTchIII], Remark 2.3.3, (viii), (ix), may itself be thought of as a
sort oftrans-hierarchical similitudebetween number ﬁelds/local ﬁelds and
function ﬁelds over number ﬁelds/local ﬁelds.
At a more technical level, theessential logical structureof inter-universal Te-
ichm¨uller theory summarized symbolically in (∧(˙∨)-Chn) may be understood as
consisting of the following steps:
(Stp1) log-Kummer-correspondence and Galois evaluation: Thisstepcon-
sists of
exhibiting theFrobenius-like Θ-pilot at the lattice point(0,0)
of the log-theta-lattice — i.e., the data that gives rise to the
F⊩▶×μ-prime-strip that appears in thedomain of the Θ-link
—a sone possibilitywithin acollection of possibilities[cf.
(ExtInd1)!] constructed via anabelian algorithms fromholomor-
phic [relative to the0-column] ´etale-like data.
In this context, it is perhaps worth mentioning that it is alogical tautology
that the content of the above display may, equivalently, be phrased as
follows: this step consists of
the negation “¬”of the assertion of thenon-existence of the
Frobenius-like Θ-pilot at the lattice point (0,0) of the log-
theta-lattice — i.e., the data that gives rise to theF
⊩▶×μ-prime-
strip that appears in thedomain of theΘ-link — within thecol-
lection of possibilitiesconstructed via certain anabelian algo-
rithms fromholomorphic [relative to the0-column] ´etale-like
data
[cf. also the discussion of (RcnLb) below]. At the level oflabels of lat-
tice points of the log-theta-lattice, this step corresponds to thedescent
operation
(0,0) ⇝ (0, ◦)
[cf. the discussion at the end of§3.6; the discussion at the end of§3.9;
[IUTchIII], Remark 3.9.5, (viii), (sQ1), (sQ2); [IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11,
(ii), (iii)]. Finally, we recall that this step already involves the introduc-
tion of the(Ind3) indeterminacy, which may be understood as a sort
of coarse algorithmic approximation of the complicated apparatus
constituted by thelog-Kummer-correspondenceand Galois evaluation[cf.
(ExtInd1), as well as the discussion of (logORInd) in §3.11 below; the
discussion of thealgorithmic parallel transport (APT) property in
[IUTchIII], Remark 3.11.1, (iv)].
(Stp2) Introduction of (Ind1): This step consists of observing that

===== PAGE 149 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 149
the anabelian construction algorithms of (Stp1) in factdescend
to — i.e., areequivalent to algorithms that only require as in-
put data theweaker data constituted by [cf. the discussion of
“descent” in§3.9] — the associatedmono-analytic ´etale-like
data, i.e., in the notation of (sQGOut), the “Gv’s”.
At the level of labels of lattice points of the log-theta-lattice, this step
corresponds to thedescent operation
(0, ◦) ⇝ (0, ◦)⊢
[cf. [IUTchIII], Remark 3.9.5, (viii), (sQ1), (sQ2); [IUTchIII], Theorem
3.11, (i), as well as the references to [IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11, (i), in
[IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11, (iii)]. Finally, we recall that this step involves
the introduction of the(Ind1) indeterminacy,w h i c h[very mildly!—
cf. the discussion of (Ind3>1+2) in §3.11 below] increases thecollection
of possibilitiesunder consideration [cf. (ExtInd1)].
(Stp3) Introduction of (Ind2): This step consists of observing that
the anabelian construction algorithms of (Stp2) in factdescend
to — i.e., areequivalent to algorithms that only require as in-
put data theweaker data constituted by [cf. the discussion of
“descent” in§3.9] — the associatedmono-analytic Frobenius-
like data, i.e., in the notation of (sQGOut) and (MnOut), the
“Gv ↷ O×μ
Fv
’s”.
[That is to say, one constructs log-shells, for instance, as submonoids of
“O×μ
Fv
”, as opposed to subquotients of “Gv”.] At the level oflabels of
lattice points of the log-theta-lattice, this step corresponds to thedescent
operation
(0, ◦)⊢ ⇝ (0,0)⊢
[cf. [IUTchIII], Remark 3.9.5, (viii), (sQ1), (sQ2); [IUTchIII], Theorem
3.11, (i), as well as the references to [IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11, (i), in
[IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11, (iii)]. Since the Θ-link may be thought of as a
sort ofequivalence of labels
(0,0)⊢ ⇐⇒ (1,0)⊢
— i.e., corresponding to thefull poly-isomorphismof F⊩▶×μ-prime-strips
constituted by the Θ-link — thisdescent operationmeans that the algo-
rithm under consideration may be regarded as an algorithm whoseinput
data is the mono-analytic Frobenius-like data (1,0)⊢ arising from
the codomain of the Θ-link. This step involves the introduction of the
(Ind2) indeterminacy,w h i c h[very mildly! — cf. the discussion of
(Ind3>1+2) in §3.11 below] increases, at least from ana priori point of
view, the collection of possibilities under consideration [cf. (ExtInd1)].
Finally, we recall that this step plays the important role of

===== PAGE 150 =====

150 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
isolating the log-link indeterminacies in thedomain [i.e., the
(Ind3) indeterminacy of (Stp1)] and thecodomain [i.e., thelog-
shift adjustment discussed in (Stp7) below] of the Θ-link from
one another
[cf. the discussion of [IUTchIII], Remark 3.9.5, (vii), (Ob7-2); [Alien],
§3.6, (iv)]. Here, we recall [cf. the discussion of the ﬁnal portion of [Alien],
§3.3, (ii)] that theselog-link indeterminacies on either side of the Θ-link
may be understood, in the context of the discussion of (InfH) in§3.3, as
corresponding to the copies “C×” on either side of the double coset space
“C×\GL+
2 (R)/C×”.
(Stp4) Passage to the holomorphic hull: The passage from the collection of
possible regionsthat appear in theoutput dataof (Stp3) to the collection
of regions contained in theholomorphic hull— relative to the 1-column
of the log-theta-lattice — of the union of possible regions of the output
data of (Stp3) [cf. [IUTchIII], Remark 3.9.5, (vi); [IUTchIII], Remark
3.9.5, (vii), (Ob5); [IUTchIII], Remark 3.9.5, (viii), (sQ3)] is a simple,
straighforward application of (ExtInd1), that is to say, ofincreasing the
set of possibilities[i.e., of “˙∨’s”]. The purpose of this step, together with
(Stp5) below, is to pass fromarbitrary regionsto regions corresponding
to arithmetic vector bundles[cf. [IUTchIII], Remark 3.9.5, (vii), (Ob1),
(Ob2)].
(Stp5) Passage to hull-approximants: This step consists of passing from the
collection of arbitrary regions contained in theholomorphic hullof (Stp4)
to hull-approximants, i.e., regions that have thesame global log-volume
as the original “arbitrary regions”, but which correspond toarithmetic
vector bundles [cf. [IUTchIII], Remark 3.9.5, (vii), (Ob6); [IUTchIII],
Remark 3.9.5, (viii), (sQ3)]. This operation does not aﬀectthe logical
“∧/∨” structure of the algorithm since this operation of passing to hull-
approximants does
not aﬀectthe collection ofpossible value group portions—
i.e., “F⊩▶-prime-strips”—o f F⊩▶×μ-prime-strips determined
by forming thelog-volume of these regions
[cf. the discussion of [IUTchIII], Remark 2.4.2; the discussion of (IPL) in
[IUTchIII], Remark 3.11.1, (iii)].
(Stp6) Passage to a suitable positive rational tensor power of the de-
terminant: This step consists of passing from the [regions corresponding
to]arithmetic vector bundlesobtainedin (Stp4), (Stp5) toasuitable tensor
power rootof atensor powerof thedeterminant arithmetic line bundleof
such an arithmetic vector bundle [cf. [IUTchIII], Remark 3.9.5, (vii),
(Ob3), (Ob4); [IUTchIII], Remark 3.9.5, (viii), (sQ3)]. Just as in the case
of (Stp5), this operation doesnot aﬀectthe logical “∧/∨” structure of the
algorithm since this operation of passing to a suitable positive rational
tensor power of the determinant does
not aﬀectthe collection ofpossible value group portions—

===== PAGE 151 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 151
i.e., “F⊩▶-prime-strips”—o f F⊩▶×μ-prime-strips determined
by forming thelog-volume of these regions
[cf. the discussion of [IUTchIII], Remark 2.4.2; the discussion of (IPL) in
[IUTchIII], Remark 3.11.1, (iii)].
(Stp7) Log-shift adjustment:T h earithmetic line bundles that appear in
(Stp6) occur with respect to the arithmetic holomorphic structure — i.e.,
in eﬀect,ring structure—a tt h el a b e l( 1,1) of the log-theta-lattice, i.e.,
at a labelvertically shiftedby +1 relative to the label (1,0) that forms the
codomain of the Θ-link [cf. the discussion of [IUTchIII], Remark 3.9.5,
(vii), (Ob8); [IUTchIII], Remark 3.9.5, (viii), (sQ4)]. That is to say, by
applying the algorithm discussed in (Stp1)∼ (Stp6) ateach lattice point
(1,m)[ w h e r em ∈ Z] of the 1-column of the log-theta-lattice, we obtain
algorithms withinput dataat (1,m)a n doutput dataat (1,m +1 )—cf.
the diagonal arrowsof the diagram below. Thus,
the totality of all of thesediagonal arrows may be thought of
as a sort ofendomorphism of the 1-column of the log-theta-
lattice, i.e., an algorithm whoseinput data is the 1-column of
the log-theta-lattice, and whoseoutput data lies in thesame
1-column of the log-theta-lattice.
1-
column
1-
column
...
...
••
↑⏐⏐log ↗
↑⏐⏐log
••
↑⏐⏐log ↗
↑⏐⏐log
••
↑⏐
⏐
log ↗
↑⏐
⏐
log
••
... ...
Indeed, one may think of the input data of the algorithm discussed in
(Stp1) ∼ (Stp6) applied at the lattice point (1,m) as being equipped with
the label (1,m)↱, while the output data of this algorithm applied at the
lattice point (1,m) as being equipped with thelabel ↱(1,m +1), i.e., where
one regards these labels (1,m)↱ and ↱(1,m +1)asbeing “reﬁnements”of
the respective original labels (1,m)a n d( 1,m +1) of the 1-column, which
may be recovered byforgetting the additional data “↱” constituted by the
input/output of the algorithm under consideration. Moreover, one may

===== PAGE 152 =====

152 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
consider a“composite reﬁnement”↱(1,m)↱, i.e., obtained by taking the [q-
pilot F⊩▶×μ-prime-strip with thesame labelas the]output dataof ↱(1,m)
as theinput dataof (1,m)↱. Here, we note that theseinput/output labels
“↱” are, in eﬀect,implicit in thespecies-theoreticsense [cf. the discussion
surrounding (NSsQ) in §3.8; the discussion of [IUTchIV], §3] — where
we observe that the“package of data”constituted by a species may be
understood as a sort oflabel! — in which the terms“input data”/“output
data”are used throughout [IUTchIII] in the discussion of themultiradial
algorithm of [IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11. Then considering thetotality of
all thediagonal arrowscorresponds to considering the“diagonal”[i.e., in
the sense of“symmetrized”] collection of data, relative to thesymmetry
given byZ ∋ m ↦→ m+1 ∈ Z, which inducescompatible symmetries
↱(1,m)↱ ↦→ ↱(1,m +1) ↱;( 1 ,m) ↦→ (1,m +1)
[cf. the discussion of (Stp8) below]. Here, it is important to observe that
the use of these labels (1, −)↱, ↱(1, −), ↱(1, −)↱ renders explicit the sense
in which
the gluing, up to suitableindeterminacies, arising from the
[algorithm denoted by the] correspondingdiagonal arrowof the
diagram shown above between theinput data (1,m)↱ and the
output data ↱(1,m +1) is — not (!) a gluing embedded in
some familiar ambient space [cf. the discusssion of (FxEuc),
(FxFld) in the ﬁnal portion of §3.1], but rather — a formal,
diagram-theoretic gluingbetween data withdistinct labels
[i.e., induced, in eﬀect, by thelabels constituted by the various
coordinatesof thelog-theta-lattice, via the variousdescent opera-
tions that appear in the algorithm discussed in (Stp1)∼ (Stp6)],
hence, in particular,
does notgiverisetoany nontrivial set-theoretic conclusions
— i.e., such as themanifest contradiction (!) that arises, if
one arbitrarily eliminates/forgets the input/output labels “↱”,
between the gluing constituted by the diagonal arrows of the
diagram shown above [i.e., between thelocal value groupportions
of theq-pilot codomainF⊩▶×μ-prime-strips and domain Θ-pilot
F⊩▶×μ-prime-strips of the arrows, where the latter is subject to
suitable indeterminacies] and thegluings of adjacent local value
groups/unit groupsconstituted by thelog-links — at any of the
intermediate stepsthat appear in the course of the execution
of (Stp1) ∼ (Stp6).
That is to say, it is only by applying thesymmetrization procedure de-
scribed above that we obtain aclosed loop[cf. the discussion of Example
3.1.1, (iii); the discussion below of (DstMp), (FxGl), (NoCmpIss), (En-
glf); the discussion of [IUTchIII], Remark 3.9.5, (ix); [Alien],§3.11, (v)],
i.e., in the language of the discussion surrounding (DltLb) in§3.11 below,
a situation thatsimulates — via the introduction of suitableindeter-
minacies [cf. the discussion of (Stp8) below] — a situation in which the

===== PAGE 153 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 153
distinct labels on the domain and codomain of the Θ-link have been
eliminated, hence allows one to draw, in anessentially formal manner
[cf. the discussion of (Stp8) below],nontrivial set-theoretic conclu-
sions [cf. the discussion surrounding (NSsQ), (LVsQ) in the ﬁnal portion
of §3.8]. Here, we note that thediagonally symmetrizedlocal value groups
that one must consider in order to obtain such aclosed loopare, in eﬀect,
obtained by pulling back these local value groups to the labels “↱(1,m)↱”
from the original labels “(1,m)” of the 1-column of the log-theta-lattice,
i.e., via the forgetting operation ↱(1,m)↱ ⇝ (1,m), hence, in particular,
are necessarilysubject to the condition ofcompatibility with the glu-
ings ofadjacent local value groups/unit groupsconstituted by thelog-links.
This compatibilityis established by passing tolog-volumes and applying
the invariance of the log-volume with respect to thelog-link [cf. the
discussion of [IUTchIII], Remark 3.9.5, (vii), (Ob9)], which may be inter-
preted as asserting, in eﬀect, that thelog-link induces, via passage to the
log-volume,a n isomorphism between corresponding adjacent local value
groups in the 1-column of the log-theta-lattice [cf. (Stp8) below]. Put
another way, this compatibility of thelog-volume with the log-links in the
1-column of the log-theta-lattice may be regarded as a sort of
“version/analogue for iterates of thelog-links in the 1-column”
of thesaturation with respect to iterates of thelog-links in the
0-column discussed in (logORInd) [cf. §3.11] below,
hence, in particular, as a sort of “1-column version/analogue” of the re-
markable phenomenon constituted by the “stark contrastbetween thepo-
tency of [the 0-column] (logORInd) and theutterly meaningless nature
of (ΘORInd)” [cf. the discussion of§3.11 below]. Finally, in this context,
it is interesting to observe, from ahistorical point of view,t h a t
the set-theoretic confusion[e.g., in the form themanifest con-
tradiction discussed above!] that arises atintermediate stepsin
the course of the execution of (Stp1)∼ (Stp6) if one doesnot
take into account the various labels of thelog-theta-lattice,a sw e l l
as the additionalinput/output labelsdiscussed above [i.e., which
are, in eﬀect, induced by various labels or collections of labels of
the log-theta-lattice ], isremarkably reminiscent of the his-
torical Weierstrass/Riemann dispute that arose in complex
function theory in the context of the theory ofanalytic con-
tinuation/Riemann surfaces, i.e., prior to the development
of modernaxiomatic set theoryin the early 20-th century
[cf. the discussion of §1.5] — where we note that, in this analogy, the
various labels of thelog-theta-lattice, as well as the additionalinput/output
labels discussed above, correspond to theset-theoretically distinct labelsof
various copies of thecomplex open unit discthat appear in the theory of
analytic continuation/Riemann surfaces.
(Stp8) Passage to log-volumes:T h eclosed loop of (Stp7) [cf. also the
discussionofExample3.1.1, (iii); thediscussionbelowof(DstMp), (FxGl),
(NoCmpIss), (Englf)] implies that the cruciallogical AND “∧”relation

===== PAGE 154 =====

154 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
carefully maintained throughout the execution of (Stp1)∼ (Stp7) yields,
upon taking thelog-volume,a
logical AND “∧”relationship between the original q-pilot
input F⊩▶-prime-stripandacertainalgorithmicallyconstructed
collection of possible output F⊩▶-prime-strips within the
same container, i.e., some copy of the real numbers “R”
[cf. [IUTchIII], Remark 3.9.5, (vii), (Ob9); [IUTchIII], Remark 3.9.5,
(viii), (sQ5); [IUTchIII], Remark 3.9.5, (ix); the discussion of Substeps
(xi-d), (xi-e) of the proof of [IUTchIII], Corollary 3.12; the discussion
of [IUTchIII], Remark 3.12.2, (ii); [Alien], §3.11, (v)]. The inequality
in the statement of [IUTchIII], Corollary 3.12, then follows as a formal
consequence of theinvarianceof thelog-volumewith respect to thelog-
link [cf. the discussion of the ﬁnal portion of (Stp7) above; the discussion
of Substeps (xi-e), (xi-f), (xi-g) of the proof of [IUTchIII], Corollary 3.12;
[IUTchIII], Remark 3.12.2, (iv), (v)]. Here, we observe that the various
indeterminacies [such as (Ind1), (Ind2), (Ind3)] that arise in the course
of applying (Stp1) ∼ (Stp7) may be thought of as a sort ofmonodromy
associated to the closed loop of (Stp7) [cf. also the discussion below of
(DstMp), (FxGl), (NoCmpIss), (Englf)]. In this context, we recall from
(Stp7) that thediagramof arrows “↗”f r o mt h e1-columnto the 1-column
in (Stp7) admitssymmetries
(1,m) ↦→ (1,m +1)
[where m ∈ Z]t h a ta r ecompatible with all of the arrows in thediagram,
as well as with the various arrows of thelog-Kummer-correspondencein
the 1-column. These symmetries allow one tosynchronize the various
“monodromy indeterminacies”associated to each “↗” [i.e., to each
application of (Stp1)∼ (Stp6)], so that one may think in terms of asingle,
synchronized collection of “monodromy indeterminacies”associated to
the totality of “↗’s” in (Stp7).
Before proceeding, we pause to examine the meaning of the term “closed
loop”in (Stp7), (Stp8), which is sometimes asource of confusion. The intended
meaning of this term is that the sequence of mathematics objects on which the series
of operations in (Stp1)∼ (Stp6) [cf. also [IUTchIII], Fig. I.8] are performed forms
a closed loopin the sense that the ultimateoutput datalies in the same container
[i.e., up to alog-shift in the 1-column, as discussed in (Stp7)] as theinput data.
On the other hand, at the level of the actualmathematical objects that
o n ei sw o r k i n gw i t h ,t h et e r m“closed loop”has the potential to result in certain
fundamental misunderstandings, since it may be [mistakenly!] interpreted as
suggesting that
(DstMp) one is considering two distinct mappingsof abstract prime-stripsto
[Θ,q-]pilot prime-strips.
Once one takes this point of view (DstMp), there is inevitably an issue ofdiagram
commutativity, i.e., the issue discussed in§3.6, (Syp2), that one must contend

===== PAGE 155 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 155
with. As discussed in Example 2.4.5, (iv), (v), (vi), (vii), (viii) [cf. also Examples
3.10.1, 3.10.2 below], this point of view (DstMp) corresponds toEssOR-IUT [i.e.,
“essentially OR IUT”], which, as the name suggests, is essentially [thought not
precisely!] equivalent toOR-IUT, and in particular, constitutes afundamental
misunderstanding of the logical structure of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory.
Indeed, the chain of AND relations “∧”discussed in §3.6, as well as the
present §3.10, which lies at the heart of the essential logical structure of inter-
universal Teichm¨uller theory, consists precisely of
(FxGl) ﬁxing the Frobenius-likeq-pilot at the lattice point (1,0 ) ,a sw e l la st h e
gluing [i.e., “∧”!] via the Θ-link of thisq-pilot at (1,0) to the Frobenius-
like Θ-pilot at the lattice point (0,0) [cf. [IUTchIII], Remark 3.12.2, (ii),
(citw), (eitw), (fitw)].
One then proceeds to add to this Θ-pilot at the lattice point (0,0) more and more
possibilities/indeterminacies [i.e., “∨”, or, alternatively, “˙∨”!] in order to obtain
data that descends to the same label [i.e., up to alog-shift in the 1-column, as
discussed in (Stp7)] as theq- p i l o ta t( 1,0). That is to say,
(NoCmpIss) there isneveranyissue of compatibilitybetweentwo distinct map-
pings of abstract prime-strips, as in (DstMp).
From a pictorial point of view, at the level ofmathematical objects,o n ei s
working in (Stp1)∼ (Stp8) —not with a “closed loop”(!), but rather — asingle
ﬁxed line segment
• ==
∧
=== •
corresponding to thegluing [i.e., “∧”!] of (FxGl) [so the “•’s” on theleft and right
correspond, respectively, to the Θ-pilot at (0,0) and the q- p i l o ta t( 1,0)], which
is then subjected to subsequent“fuzziﬁcations”[i.e., “∨”, or alternatively, “˙∨”!]
o ft h eΘ - p i l o ta t( 0,0) [denoted in the following display by the notation “(... )”,
which may be thought of as representing a“fuzzy disc”that contains the “•”o n
the left] that terminate in a situation [cf. the ﬁnal line of the following display] in
which
(Englf) the fuzziﬁcations engulf the q-pilot at (1,0), i.e., a situation in which
the distinct labels may be eliminatedand nontrivial consequencesmay be
obtained [cf. (Stp7), (Stp8), as well as the discussion surrounding (DltLb)
in §3.11 below].
• ==
∧
=== •
⇝ ( ∨• =) =
∧
=== •
⇝ ( ∨∨• == )
∧
=== •
⇝ ( ∨∨∨• ==
∧
=) = = •
⇝ ( ∨∨∨∨• ==
∧
== )= •
⇝ ( ∨∨∨∨∨• ==
∧
== = ) •
⇝ ( ∨∨∨∨∨∨• ==
∧
=== • )

===== PAGE 156 =====

156 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Thus, in summary, throughout the series offuzziﬁcation operations constituted by
(Stp1) ∼ (Stp8), the line segment representing the gluing [i.e., “∧”!] of (FxGl)
remains ﬁxed, so [cf. (NoCmpIss), (Englf)] there isnever any issue of compat-
ibility between two distinct mappingsof abstract prime-strips, as in (DstMp).
Example 3.10.1: Symmetries as a fundamental non-formal aspect of glu-
ings. One psychological aspect, and indeed [in many cases] possible cause,o f
the fundamental misunderstandings discussed above [cf. the discussion above sur-
rounding (DstMp), as well as the discussion surrounding (RfsDlg), (DngPrc) in
§1.12] concerning theessential logical structureof inter-universal Teichm¨uller the-
ory — i.e., the [erroneous!] point of view that this essential logical structure of
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory should be understood as centering around an
issue ofdiagram commutativity— is the following. In any sort ofgluing sit-
uation — i.e., from a category-theoretic point of view, any sort of situation [cf.
the numerous examples of gluings discussed throughout the present paper, e.g., in
Examples 2.3.2, 2.4.1, 2.4.2, 2.4.3, 2.4.7, 2.4.8, 3.3.1, 3.5.2] in which one considers
the [possibly formal]inductive limitI of a diagram of the form
Y1 ←− X −→ Y2
— there is a certain tendency to fall into the“mental trap”of believing that it is
a “tautology”that
(UnvPrp) any conceivable nontrivial/interesting property of I should be
understood in terms of theuniversal propertyof an inductive limit, i.e.,
the property to the eﬀect that any arrow fromI to some objectZ should
be understood in terms of the issue ofcommutativity of a diagram of
the form
X −→ Y2
⏐⏐
↓ ↷ ?
⏐⏐
↓
Y
1 −→ Z
— i.e., where the left-hand vertical and upper horizontal arrows are the
arrows in the deﬁnition ofI.
Here, we observe that
(UnvPrpOR) the diagram commutativityissue that arises when one considers theuni-
versal property discussed in (UnvPrp) is essentially alogical OR “∨”
situation: that is to say, one can pass fromX to Z in the diagram of
(UnvPrp) viaY1 OR via Y2, but there is,a priori, no way of passingfrom
such an“OR situation”to thedesired “AND situation”that arises when
commutativity holds, i.e., the situation where one knows that there is a
single arrow from X to Z that is simultaneously equal to the composite
of the two arrows that pass throughY1 and equal to the composite of the
two arrows that pass throughY2
— cf. the discussion of Example 2.4.5, (iv), (v), (vi), (vii), (viii). Of course, it
is indeed a tautology that I satisﬁes a universal propertyas in (UnvPrp), but the
point is that

===== PAGE 157 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 157
(FlsUnv) the fact thatI satisﬁes such a universal property doesnot by any means
imply — i.e., as one mightfalsely concludefrom thenuancecarried by the
word “universal”in ordinary, non-technical contexts! — thatany con-
ceivable nontrivial/interesting property of I is best understood
in terms of thisuniversal property.
That is to say,
(SymPrp) there are numerous examples in mathematics of objects “I”t h a ta r e
constructed as gluings, but that satisfy important nontrivial properties
such as symmetry properties — e.g., of the sort discussed in§3.2 [cf.,
especially, Example 3.2.2!] — that do not admit any natural “general
nonsense” formulationin terms of theuniversal propertyof (UnvPrp).
In the spirit of (UnvPrpOR), it is of interest to note that
(SymPrpAND) symmetry properties typically concern some sort of invariant,o r
“coric”, structure that is commonly shared throughout various “local-
izations” of the diagram that gives rise toI, where we recall that it is es-
sentially atautology that this sort of notion of acommonly shared “coric”
propertyis alogical AND “∧”situation
— cf. the discussion of Example 2.4.5, (iv), (v), (vi), (vii), (viii), as well as the dis-
cussion of (FxGl), (NoCmpIss), (Englf), above. Well-known elementary examples
of the phenomenon discussed in (SymPrp) include
(i) the projective general linear symmetries[i.e., “PGL2”] of thepro-
jective line, which may be constructed as agluing of two copies of the
aﬃne line [cf. Example 2.4.7, (iv), (v)];
(ii) the group structure of an elliptic curve, which, as is well-known,
may be constructed as agluing of two cubic planar aﬃne curves;
(iii) the group ofgeneral linear oriented symmetriesGL+
2 (R)o ft h et w o -
dimensional R-vector space R2 — cf. the discussion of thedouble coset
space
C×\GL+
2 (R)/C×
in §3.3, (InfH) — in the situation of thecomplex Teichm¨uller defor-
mations discussed in Example 3.3.1, where we recall that this situation
may be regarded [cf. the discussion at the beginning of Example 3.5.2] as
a “gluing”of two distinct copiesof thecomplex planeC along acommon
underlying two-dimensional R-vector space R2 [cf. also Example 3.5.2,
(iii)], and we observe that these symmetries GL+
2 (R) allow one to re-
gard each of the twoholomorphic structures[i.e., copies ofC] that appear
in this gluing asindeterminate GL+
2 (R)-conjugates of the subgroup
C× ⊆ GL+
2 (R) inside thecommon containerGL+
2 (R);
(iv) the common holomorphic structure that appears in the classical
theory of analytic continuation of one-variable complex holomorphic
functions — cf., e.g., the discussion of the theory ofanalytic continuation
of thecomplex logarithmin the discussion surrounding (FxEuc) in§3.1,
as well as in thehistorical discussionof §1.5 and the discussion of thetoral
rotations “C×”i n§3.3, (InfH) — where we observe that suchanalytic

===== PAGE 158 =====

158 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
continuations may be regarded asgluings of copies of thecomplex open
unit disc, and that thecommon holomorphic structuremay be regarded as
a sort ofcommon symmetryof such gluings, i.e., if one thinks in terms
of “almost complex structures”, that is to say, in terms of thesymmetry
of the tangent bundle given bymultiplication byi = √ −1.
Here, we observe in passing that it is of interest to note, in the context of (ii), that
the group structureof an elliptic curve, as well as the existence ofinvariant [i.e.,
with respect to this group structure]diﬀerentialson the elliptic curve, play acentral
role in the argument discussed in Example 3.2.1 — an argument that itself played
a fundamental role in motivating theessential logical structureof inter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory [cf. Example 3.2.1, (viii)]. Of course, as discussed extensively
in §3.3 [cf. (InfH); Examples 3.3.1, 3.3.2], the situations discussed in (iii), (iv) also
exhibit numerous important structural similaritiesto various important aspects of
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory.
Example 3.10.2: Chains of logical AND relations via commutative dia-
grams. We maintain the notation of Example 3.10.1.
(i) As discussed at the beginning of Example 3.10.1,
(ORAch) the “diagram-commutativity”,o r“OR approach”[cf. (UnvPrp),
(UnvPrpOR)],
Y1 ←− X −→ Y2
↘ ↷ ? ↙
Z
to analyzing the structure of the [possibly formal]inductive limitI of the
upper line of the above diagram constitutes a sort of“mental trap”that
appearstobe, inmanycases, oneofthe main causesofthe fundamental
misunderstandings that exist in certain sectors of the mathematical
community concerning inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory.
[Here, we recall that, in the situation considered in inter-universal Teichm¨uller
theory, the initial gluing in the ﬁrst horizontal line of the diagram of (ORAch)
corresponds to the gluing constituted by the Θ-link between the “Θ-pilot object
in the Θ-(Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theater”Y1 and the “q-pilot object in theq-(Θ±ellNF-
)Hodge theater”Y2 along the prime-strip dataX, while “Z” is to be understood
as some sort of container that contains both Y1 and Y2.] The state of aﬀairs
summarized in (ORAch) thus prompts the following question:
(Q∧(∨)CCD) Since the tendency of many mathematicians — especially those who
work in abstract areas ofarithmetic geometry! — to try to interpret the
essential logical structure of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory in terms
of the [incorrect!] “OR approach”of (ORAch) appears to stem, to a
substantial extent, from the fact that such mathematicians often have a
strong desire to formulate structural properties of mathematical objects
in terms ofcommutative diagrams, is it possible to somehow formulate
the essential logical structure of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory

===== PAGE 159 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 159
summarized in (∧(∨)-Chn) — or, alternatively, (∧(˙∨)-Chn) — in terms of
some sort ofcollection of commutative diagrams?
Here, we recall from the discussion at the beginning of the present§3.10 [cf. also
the discussion surrounding (SymIUT) in§1.12] that themain thrustof the present
paper lies in formulatingtheessential logical structureofinter-universalTeichm¨uller
theory [modulo certain“blackboxes”in anabelian geometryand the theory of´etale
theta functions]i nt e r m so flogical AND “∧”/logical OR “∨”r e l a t i o n s.T h e
fundamental motivation for this approach taken in the present paper lies in the
point of view that suchlogical AND “∧”/logical OR “∨”r e l a t i o n sconstitute the
“most primitive/fundamental/universal”means available for documenting
the essential logical structure of a mathematical argument. This point of view is
also closely related to the point of view ofcomputer veriﬁcation of mathematical
arguments discussed at the beginning of §1.12 [cf. (CmbVer), (Algor)]. On the
other hand, even if this point of view is in some sense“correct”from anabstract,
theoretical standpoint,i ti snot necessarilythe case that this point of view is also
correct from the somewhat morepractical standpointof developing an optimally
eﬃcient means ofcommunicating the essential logical structure of inter-universal
Teichm¨ullertheorytoothermathematicians. Itispreciselythispracticalstandpoint
that motivates the question posed in (Q∧(∨)CCD).
(ii) In a word, it is not very diﬃcult to give anaﬃrmative answer to the
question posed in (Q∧(∨)CCD). Indeed,
(∧(∨)CCD) one may formulate the essential logical structure of inter-universal
Teichm¨uller theory summarized in (∧(∨)-Chn) — or, alternatively, (∧(˙∨)-
Chn) — in terms of achain of [tautologically!] commutative dia-
grams as follows:
Y1 ←− X −→ Y2
⏐⏐↓ ↷ ! ∥ ↷ ! ∥
Y′
1 ←− X −→ Y2
⏐⏐↓ ↷ ! ∥ ↷ ! ∥
Y′′
1 ←− X −→ Y2
...
...
...
— where the left-hand vertical arrows are natural inclusion morphisms
into larger and larger containers,a n d“↷ !” denotes thetautological
commutativity of the square in question.
That is to say, thischain of [tautologically!] commutative diagrams exhibits the
initial gluing in the ﬁrst horizontal line— i.e., the gluing constituted by the Θ-
link between the “Θ-pilot object in theΘ-(Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theater”Y1 and the
“q-pilot object in theq-(Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theater”Y2 along the prime-strip dataX
— as an object that mapstautologically to thegluings in the subsequent horizontal
lines, which consist ofcopies of the initial gluing in the ﬁrst horizontal line, but
with the “Θ-pilot object in the Θ-(Θ±ellNF-)Hodge theater”Y1 regarded up to
suitable indeterminacies,o r“alternative possibilities”[i.e., as discussed in (Stp1)∼
(Stp8)], exhibited inlarger and larger containers“Y′
1”, “Y′′
1 ”,... . Put another way,

===== PAGE 160 =====

160 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
this approach consists ofembedding Y1 into larger and larger containers[i.e.,
the containers obtaining by adding the variousindeterminacies] until the container
becomes suﬃciently large as tocontain/engulf [not onlyY1, but also (!)]Y2 [cf.
the discussion surrounding (Englf)].
(iii) At ﬁrst glance, the approach discussed in (∧(∨)CCD) may appear to some
arithmetic geometers to be entirely unfamiliar and fundamentally diﬀerentfrom
the approach taken in the numerous theories in arithmetic geometry that existed
prior to the appearance of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory. In fact, however,
the approach discussed in (∧(∨)CCD) is entirely analogous to the approach taken
in the classical theory ofcrystals. Moreover, this analogy with the classical the-
ory of crystals iscompletely compatiblewith the discussion of thestrong structural
resemblances between inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory and the theory of crys-
tals given in [Alien], §3.1, (v) [cf. also §3.5 of the present paper, as well as the
discussion of (∧(˙∨)-Chn) in the present§3.10]. Indeed, the “container of inde-
terminacies”discussed in (ii) may be understood as corresponding to thePD-
envelopes/thickenings that apppear in the theory of crystals. That is to say,
the approach typically taken in the theory of crystals to constructing [nontrivial!]
crystals — i.e., to constructing isomorphisms
p∗
1(−)
∼
→ p∗
2(−)
between the pull-backs via the two natural projections
Y
p1
←− Y ×Y
p2
−→ Y
of some object “(−)” on some schemeY — proceedsnot by securing some sort of
commutative diagram
Y
p1
←− Y ×Y
p2
−→ Y
↘ ↷ ? ↙
Z
— i.e., corresponding to the [incorrect!] “OR approach”of (ORAch)! — such
that the object “(−)” onY descends to Z, but rather by restricting to the“suf-
ﬁciently large container”constituted by a suitablePD-envelope/thickening
of the diagonal inY ×Y and verifying that this container is indeedsuﬃciently large
that the restriction to this PD-envelope/thickening ofp∗
1(−) already contains, up
to isomorphism, the inverse imagep−1
2 (−).
§3.11. The central importance of thelog-Kummer-correspondence
In the context of the discussion of§3.10, it is important to recall that, whereas
(Stp2) ∼ (Stp8) aretechnically trivialin the sense that they concern operations that
are very elementary and only require a few lines to describe, thelog-Kummer-
correspondence and Galois evaluationoperations that comprise (Stp1) depend
on thehighly nontrivialtheory of [EtTh] and [AbsTopIII]. Moreover, the technical
description of these operations that comprise (Stp1) occupies the bulk of [IUTchI-
III]. The central importance of (Stp1) may also be seen in thesubordinate nature

===== PAGE 161 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 161
of (Ind1), (Ind2) [which occur in (Stp2), (Stp3)] relative to (Ind3) [which occurs in
(Stp1)], i.e., in the sense that
(Ind3>1+2) once one constructs the output of the multiradial representation of
theΘ-pilot[cf. [IUTchIII],Theorem3.11, (ii)]via tensor-packets of log-
shells in such a way that each local portion of this output isstable with
respect to the indeterminacy (Ind3), these local portions of the output
are automatically “essentially stable”[i.e., stable up to discrepancies at
the valuations ∈ Vbad that aﬀect the resulting log-volumes only up to
very small/essentially negligible order] with respect to the indeterminacies
(Ind1), (Ind2) [cf. [IUTchIII], Theorem 3.11, (i)].
Finally, we observe that this property (Ind3>1+2) is strongly reminiscent of the
discussion of (CnfInd1+2) and (CnfInd3) in§3.5.
One way to understand the content of the operations of (Stp1) is as follows.
These operations may be regarded as a sort of
(logORInd) saturation of the Frobenius-like Θ-pilot at the lattice point (0,0)
of the log-theta-lattice — i.e., which is linked, via the Θ-link, to the
Frobenius-like q-pilot at (0,1) — with respect toall of the possibil-
ities that occur in the 0-column of the log-theta-lattice, i.e., all of the
possibilities that arise from apossible confusionbetween thedomain and
codomainof the log-links in the 0-column [cf. the description of (Stp1)].
In this sense, the content of (Stp1) isformally reminiscent of the “(NeuORInd)”
that appeared in the discussion of§3.4, i.e., which may be understood as a sort of
(ΘORInd) saturation of theFrobenius-like Θ-pilot at the lattice point (0,0) of
thelog-theta-latticewithrespectto all of thepossibilities —i.e., “Θ-plt”,
“q-plt” [cf. (NeuORInd2)] — that arise from apossible confusionbetween
the domain and codomain of the Θ-link joining the lattice points (0,0)
and (0,1).
[In this context, we note that thelogical OR “∨’s”that appear in (logORInd),
(ΘORInd) may in fact be understood aslogical XOR “˙∨’s”— cf. the discussion
surrounding (∧(˙∨)-Chn) in §3.10.] On the other hand, whereas, as observed in the
discussion at the end of§3.4, (ΘORInd) yields ameaningless/uselesssituation that
does not give rise to any interesting mathematical consequences, (logORInd), by
contrast, is ahighly potent technical devicethat forms thetechnical coreof
inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory.
Before preceding, we observe that, in this context, it is interesting to note that
both of these “saturation operations”(logORInd) and (ΘORInd) are
in some sense qualitatively similar to the label crushing operation
(ExtInd2).
Indeed, (ExtInd2) consists, roughly speaking, of regarding mathematical objects of
a certain typeup to isomorphism, i.e., ofsaturating within an isomorphism class
of mathematical objects of a certain type [cf. the discussion of (ExtInd2) in§3.8,
as well as the discussion of (DltLb) below].
The stark contrastbetween thepotency of (logORInd) and theutterly mean-
ingless nature of (ΘORInd) ishighly reminiscent of the central role played, in

===== PAGE 162 =====

162 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
Example 3.3.2, (iv), byinvariance with respect to
ι=
( 01
−10
)
∈ C× ⊆ GL+
2 (R)
[where we recall from (InfH) that C× corresponds to the log-link!], which lies
in stark contrast to theutterly meaningless nature of considering invariance with
respect todilations
(λ0
01
)
∈ GL+
2 (R) [where we recall from (InfH) that such dilations
correspond to the Θ-link].
One way to witness the potency of (logORInd) is as follows. Recall that the
Θ-link, by deﬁnition [cf. [IUTchIII], Deﬁnition 3.8, (ii)], consists of
· a dilation applied to thelocal value groupportions of the ring structures
in its domain and codomain, coupled with
· a full poly-isomorphism—w h i c hpreserves log-volumes, hence isnon-
dilating! — between the local “O×μ’s”, i.e., thelocal unit groupportions,
of these ring structures.
By contrast, the log-links in the 0-column of the log-theta-lattice have the eﬀect
of “juggling/rotating/permuting”the local value groupportions andlocal unit group
portions of the ring structures that appear in this 0-column [cf., e.g., the discussion
of [Alien], Example 2.12.3, (v)]. From this point of view, thetautologically vertically
coric— i.e.,invariantwith respect to the application of thelog-link!—n a t u r eo f
the output data of (logORInd) is already somewhat“shocking”in nature. That is
to say, the tautologically vertically coric nature of this output data of (logORInd)
suggests that
(Di/NDi) this output data already exhibits some sort ofequivalence,u pt op e r -
haps some sort of mild discrepancy, between thedilatedandnon-dilated
portions of the Θ-link.
Such anequivalencealready strongly suggests that some sort ofbound on heights
should follow as aformal consequence, i.e., in the style of the classical argument
that implies theisogeny invariance of heights of elliptic curves[cf. the discussion of
[Alien], §2.3, §2.4, as well as the discussion of Example 3.2.1 in the present paper;
the discussion of§3.5 in the present paper].
Finally, weconcludebyemphasizingthat, ininter-universalTeichm¨ullertheory,
(DltLb) ultimately onedoeswant to ﬁnd some way in which todelete/eliminate
the distinct labelson the Θ- andq-pilot objects [i.e., “Θ-plt”a n d“q-plt”]
in the domain and codomain of the Θ-link
[cf. the discussion of Example 3.1.1, (iii); the discussion of (AOL4), (AOΘ4) in§3.4;
(Stp7), (Stp8) in§3.10], that is to say,not via thenaive, simple-mindedapproach of
(ΘORInd) [i.e., (NeuORInd2) in the discussion of§3.4], but rather via theindirect
approachof applyingdescent operations
(0,0)
(Stp1)
⇝ (0, ◦)
(Stp2)
⇝ (0, ◦)⊢ (Stp3)
⇝ (0,0)⊢ (Stp3)
⇐⇒ (1,0)⊢
as discussed in (Stp1) ∼ (Stp8) [cf., especially, (Stp7), (Stp8)] of §3.10, i.e., an
approach that centers around (logORInd). This approach is based on the vari-
ous anabelian reconstruction algorithmsdiscussed in (Stp1)∼ (Stp3), which

===== PAGE 163 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 163
allow one to exhibit theFrobenius-like Θ-pilot object at (0,0) asone possibil-
ity among some broader collection of possibilitiesthat arise from the introduction
of various types ofindeterminacy. In this context, we observe [cf. the discus-
sion of (ExtInd2), (NSsQ) at the end of §3.9] that since such anabelian recon-
struction algorithms only reconstruct various types of mathematical objects [i.e.,
monoids/pseudo-monoids/mono-theta environments, etc.]not “set-theoretically on
the nose”[i.e., not in the sense ofstrict set-theoretic equality], but ratherup to [a
typically essentially unique, if one allows for suitable indeterminacies] isomorphism,
it is not immediately clear
(RcnLb) in what sense such anabelian reconstruction algorithms yield arecon-
struction of thecrucial labels — i.e., such as “(0,0)” — that underlie
the crucial logical AND “∧”structure discussed in§3.4 [cf., especially,
(AOL1), (AOΘ1)].
The point here is that indeed such anabelian reconstruction algorithms arenot
capableof reconstructing such labels“set-theoretically on the nose”.
On the other hand, in this context, it is important to recall the essential
substantive contentof the variouslabels involved:
(HolFrLb) (0,0):T h eholomorphic Frobenius-like data labeled by (0,0) con-
sists of various monoids/pseudo-monoids/mono-theta environments, etc.,
regarded asabstract monoids/pseudo-monoids/mono-theta environments,
etc., i.e., as objects that arenot equipped with the auxiliary data of how
they might have been reconstructed via anabelian algorithms fromholo-
morphic ´etale-like data labeled (0, ◦) [cf. the discussion of (UdOut), (In-
Out), (PSOut), (ItwOut) in §3.9]. In particular, such monoids/pseudo-
monoids/mono-theta environments, etc., arenot invariantwith respect
to the“juggling/rotating/permuting”of local value groupportions andlo-
cal unit groupportions eﬀected by thelog-links i nt h e0 - c o l u m no ft h e
log-theta-lattice, but rather correspond to atemporary cessation [cf.
the label (0,0) as opposed to the label (0, ◦)!] of this operation of jug-
gling/rotation/permutation.
(MnAlyLb) (0 ,0)⊢:T h emono-analytic Frobenius-like data labeled by (0,0)⊢
consists of the F⊩▶×μ-prime-strip determined by the Frobenius-like Θ-
pilot at (0,0), regarded as anabstract F⊩▶×μ-prime-strip [cf. the discus-
sionof(UdOut), (InOut), (PSOut), (ItwOut)in §3.9]. Thus, thetransition
of labels
(0,0) ⇝ (0,0)⊢
consists of an operation offorgetting some sort of auxiliary structure [cf.
the discussion of (UdOut) in§3.9]. Here, we recall that this construction
of the F⊩▶×μ-prime-strip determined by the Frobenius-like Θ-pilot at
(0,0) istechnically possibleprecisely because of the“temporary cessation”
discussed above [cf. the discussion of thedeﬁnition of theΘ-link in [Alien],
§3.3, (ii), as well as in§3.3 of the present paper].
Thus, thenontrivial substantive contentof the anabelian reconstruction algorithms
of (Stp1) ∼ (Stp3) — and hence of thedescent operations
(0,0)
(Stp1) ∼ (Stp3)
⇝ (0,0)⊢

===== PAGE 164 =====

164 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
that result from these anabelian reconstruction algorithms — consists of statements
to the eﬀect that
(FrgInv) the operation offorgetting discussed in (MnAlyLb) can in fact, if one
allows for suitableindeterminacies,b einverted.
It is precisely thisinvertibility (FrgInv), up to suitableindeterminacies,o ft h e
operation offorgetting discussed in (MnAlyLb), together with the fact that
(GluDt) the only data appearing in the reconstruction algorithms [i.e., in the
0-column]t h a ti sglued [cf. the discussion of [IUTchIII], Remark 3.11.1,
(ii); the ﬁnal portion of [Alien],§3.7, (i), as well as the discussion of the
(Ind2) indeterminacyin the ﬁnal portion of§3.11, (Stp3), in the present
paper] to data in the 1-column is the F⊩▶×μ-prime-strip labeled (0,0)⊢,
that ensures that thedescent operationsdiscussed above do indeedpreserve the
crucial logical AND “∧”relations discussed in §3.4, §3.6, §3.7, §3.10, i.e., even
though the reconstruction algorithms underlying these descent operations donot
yield reconstructions of the various labels “(0,0)”, etc., “set-theoretically on the
nose”.
Bibliography
[AnCnCv] Illustration of analytic continuation along a curve, available at the following
URL [where we note that when “copy-and-pasting” this URL, typically it will
be necessary tore-enter the underscore character “”manually,a sw e l la st o
delete stray characters that appear as a result of thecarriage returnbetween
the ﬁrst and second lines of the URL]:
https://commons.m.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Analytic continuation
along a curve.png
[AnCnLg] Illustration of analytic continuation of the complex logarithm, available at
the following URL [where we note that when “copy-and-pasting” this URL,
typically it will be necessary tore-enterthe underscorecharacter “”manually,
aswellasto deletestraycharactersthatappearasaresultofthe carriage return
between the ﬁrst and second lines of the URL]:
https://ja.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/%E3%83%95%E3%82%A1%E3%82%A4%E3%
83%AB:Imaginary log analytic continuation.png
[Bns] D. Benois, An introduction top-adic Hodge theory,Perfectoid spaces, Infosys
Sci. Found. Ser., Springer-Verlag (2022), pp. 69-219.
[Btt] U. Bottazzini, “Algebraic truths” vs. “geometric fantasies”: Weierstrass’ re-
sponse to Riemann,Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathemati-
cians, Vol. III (Beijing, 2002), Higher Ed. Press (2002), pp. 923-934.
[EMSCOP] European Mathematical Society,Code of Practice, approved by the EMS Ex-
ecutive Committee (October 2012), available at the following URL:
https://euromathsoc.org/code-of-practice
[FC] G.FaltingsandC.-L.Chai, Degenerations of Abelian Varieties,Springer-Verlag
(1990).

===== PAGE 165 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 165
[FsADT] I. Fesenko, Arithmetic deformation theory via arithmetic fundamental groups
and nonarchimedean theta-functions, notes on the work of Shinichi Mochizuki,
Eur. J. Math.1 (2015), pp. 405-440.
[GeoSph] Illustration of the metric geometry of a sphere, available at the following URL
[where we note that when “copy-and-pasting” this URL, typically it will be
necessary tore-enterthe underscorecharacter “”manually,a sw e l la st odelete
stray characters that appear as a result of thecarriage returnbetween the ﬁrst
and second lines of the URL]:
https://ja.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/%E3%83%95%E3%82%A1%E3%82%A4%E3
%83%AB:Sphere wireframe 10deg 6r.svg
[FsDss] I. Fesenko, About certain aspects of the study and dissemination of Shinichi
Mochizuki’s IUT theory, available at the following URL:
https://ivanfesenko.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/rapg.pdf
[FsPio] I. Fesenko,On pioneering mathematical research, on the occasion of the an-
nounced publication of the IUT papers by Shinichi Mochizuki, available at the
following URL:
https://ivanfesenko.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/rpp.pdf
[AnHst] E. Hairer and G. Wanner,Analysis by its history, Springer-Verlag (2008).
[FKvid] F. Kato,abc Conjecture and New Mathematics - Prof. Fumiharu Kato, Oct 7,
2017 (with English subtitles), video lecture in Japanese (with English subtitles)
available at the following URL:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fNS7N04DLAQ&feature=youtu.be
[pTch] S. Mochizuki, Foundations of p-adic Teichm¨uller Theory, AMS/IP Studies
in Advanced Mathematics 11, American Mathematical Society/International
Press (1999).
[HASurI] S. Mochizuki, A Survey of the Hodge-Arakelov Theory of Elliptic Curves I,
Arithmetic Fundamental Groups and Noncommutative Algebra, Proceedings of
Symposia in Pure Mathematics 70, American Mathematical Society (2002),
pp. 533-569.
[AbsAnab] S. Mochizuki, The Absolute Anabelian Geometry of Hyperbolic Curves,Galois
Theory and Modular Forms, Kluwer Academic Publishers (2004), pp. 77-122.
[EtTh] S. Mochizuki, The´Etale Theta Function and its Frobenioid-theoretic Manifes-
tations, Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci.45 (2009), pp. 227-349.
[GenEll] S.Mochizuki,ArithmeticEllipticCurvesinGeneralPosition, M a t h .J .O k a y a m a
Univ. 52 (2010), pp. 1-28.
[AbsTopIII] S. Mochizuki, Topics in Absolute Anabelian Geometry III: Global Reconstruc-
tion Algorithms,J. Math. Sci. Univ. Tokyo22 (2015), pp. 939-1156.
[IUTchI] S. Mochizuki, Inter-universal Teichm¨uller Theory I: Construction of Hodge
Theaters, Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci.57 (2021), pp. 3-207.
[IUTchII] S. Mochizuki, Inter-universal Teichm¨uller Theory II: Hodge-Arakelov-theoretic
Evaluation, Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci.57 (2021), pp. 209-401.
[IUTchIII] S. Mochizuki, Inter-universal Teichm¨uller Theory III: Canonical Splittings of
the Log-theta-lattice,Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci.57 (2021), pp. 403-626.

===== PAGE 166 =====

166 SHINICHI MOCHIZUKI
[IUTchIV] S. Mochizuki, Inter-universal Teichm¨uller Theory IV: Log-volume Computa-
tions and Set-theoretic Foundations,Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci.57 (2021), pp.
627-723.
[ExpEst] S. Mochizuki, I. Fesenko, Y. Hoshi, A. Minamide, W. Porowski, Explicit Es-
timates in Inter-universal Teichm¨uller Theory,Kodai Math. J.45 (2022), pp.
175-236.
[Rpt2013] S.Mochizuki, On the veriﬁcation of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory: a progress
report (as of December 2013), available at the following URL:
http://www.kurims.kyoto-u.ac.jp/~motizuki/IUTeich%20Verification
%20Report%202013-12.pdf
[Rpt2014] S.Mochizuki, On the veriﬁcation of inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory: a progress
report (as of December 2014), available at the following URL:
http://www.kurims.kyoto-u.ac.jp/~motizuki/IUTeich%20Verification
%20Report%202014-12.pdf
[Pano] S. Mochizuki, A Panoramic Overview of Inter-universal Teichm¨uller Theory,
Algebraic number theory and related topics 2012, RIMS K¯oky¯uroku Bessatsu
B51, Res. Inst. Math. Sci. (RIMS), Kyoto (2014), pp. 301-345.
[Alien] S. Mochizuki, The Mathematics of Mutually Alien Copies: from Gaussian
Integrals to Inter-universal Teichm¨uller Theory, Inter-universal Teichmuller
Theory Summit 2016, RIMS K¯oky¯uroku Bessatsu B84, Res. Inst. Math. Sci.
(RIMS), Kyoto (2021), pp. 23-192.
[Rpt2018] S. Mochizuki, Report on discussions, held during the period March 15 - 20,
2018, concerning inter-universal Teichm¨uller theory (IUTch), available at the
following URL:
http://www.kurims.kyoto-u.ac.jp/~motizuki/Rpt2018.pdf
[Dsc2018] Webpage “March 2018 Discussions on IUTeich”, available at the following
URL:
http://www.kurims.kyoto-u.ac.jp/~motizuki/IUTch-discussions-2018
-03.html
[Mumf1] D. Mumford,Abelian Varieties, Oxford Univ. Press (1974).
[Mumf2] D. Mumford, An Analytic Construction of Degenerating Abelian Varieties over
Complete Rings, Appendix to [FC].
[NSW] J.Neukirch,A.Schmidt,K.Wingberg, Cohomology of number ﬁelds, Grundlehren
der Mathematischen Wissenschaften 323, Springer-Verlag (2000).
[Pnc] H. Poincar´e, translated by F. Maitland,Science and Method, Cosimo Classics
(2010).
[SGA1] A. Grothendieck et al.,Revˆetement ´etales et groupe fondamental, S´eminaire
de G´eometrie Alg´ebrique du Bois Marie 1960-1961 (SGA1), dirig´ep a rA .
Grothendieck, augment´e de deux expos´es de M. Raynaud, Lecture Notes in
Mathematics 224, Springer-Verlag (1971).
[Tsjm] S. Tsujimura, Combinatorial Belyi cuspidalization and arithmetic subquotients
of the Grothendieck-Teichm¨uller group,Publ. Res. Inst. Math. Sci.56 (2020),
pp. 779-829.

===== PAGE 167 =====

LOGICAL STRUCTURE OF INTER-UNIVERSAL TEICHM¨ULLER THEORY 167
[Ymgt] S. Yamagata, A counterexample for the local analogy of a theorem by Iwasawa
and Uchida,Proc. Japan Acad.52 (1976), pp. 276-278.