===== PAGE 1 =====

arXiv:quant-ph/0104027v1  5 Apr 2001
Semicausal operations are semilocalizable
T. Eggeling ∗, D. Schlingemann † and R.F. Werner ‡
Institut f¨ ur Mathematische Physik, TU Braunschweig,
Mendelssohnstr.3, 38106 Braunschweig, Germany.
We prove a conjecture by DiVincenzo, which in the termi-
nology of Preskill et al. [quant-ph/0102043] states that “s em-
icausal operations are semilocalizable”. That is, we show
that any operation on the combined system of Alice and Bob,
which does not allow Bob to send messages to Alice, can be
represented as an operation by Alice, transmitting a quantu m
particle to Bob, and a local operation by Bob. The proof is
based on the uniqueness of the Stinespring representation f or
a completely positive map. We sketch some of the problems
in transferring these concepts to the context of relativist ic
quantum ﬁeld theory.
I. INTRODUCTION
In a recent paper [1] Preskill et al. focus on the con-
straints that quantum operations must fulﬁll in order to
be compatible with relativistic quantum theory. They
introduce the notions of causal, localizable, semicausal
and semilocalizable quantum operations for bipartite sys-
tems. The preﬁx semi refers to “directed” properties,
which are not invariant under exchanging Alice’s and
Bob’s system.
An operation on a bipartite system is called semilocal-
izable for Alice, if it can be decomposed into two local
operations with one way quantum communication from
Alice to Bob as illustrated by Figure 1: First Alice per-
forms a local operation G on her system and sends quan-
tum information (via C) to Bob. Then Bob performs a
local operation F on his system, depending on the infor-
mation he got from Alice.
A
G∗
A
C
B
F∗
B
FIG. 1.
∗Electronic Mail: T.Eggeling@tu-bs.de
†Electronic Mail: D.Schlingemann@tu-bs.de
‡Electronic Mail: R.Werner@tu-bs.de
An obvious consequence of this setup is that Bob can-
not send messages to Alice: the only possible carrier
of information (quantum or classical) is the system C,
which goes from Alice to Bob. Operations with this prop-
erty will be called “ semicausal ”. In other words, if we
consider only measurements on Alice’s output of a sem-
icausal operation, expectations do not depend on Bob’s
initial preparation. That is, as far as Alice is concerned,
the device can be described by an operation on her sys-
tem alone.
The main result of this paper is the proof of the con-
verse of the above remark: if a device allows no signalling
from Bob to Alice (semicausality) we can represent it ex-
plicitly as a device involving possibly a particle sent from
Alice to Bob but none in the other direction.
Causality and localizablility are deﬁned as the analo-
gous symmetric properties. From this it would seem that
these are also equivalent (just use the proof twice, with
an exchange of the roles of Alice and Bob). However, full
localizability is deﬁned to be stronger than the two semi-
localizabilities: the latter would mean only that there are
two representations, each involving only one-way commu-
nication, whereas localizability means the absence of all
communication. Indeed, in [1] an example for a causal
operation which is not localizable has been given.
Thus all proven implications between causal, semi-
causal, localizable and semilocalizable operations (in-
cluding the results of this paper) can be visualized in
the following diagram:
localizable = ⇒ causal
⇓ ⇓
semilocalizable ⇐ ⇒ semicausal
(1)
As in [1], the concepts introduced so far only require
the standard setup of quantum information theory, in
which “localization” is phrased entirely in terms of the
Hilbert space tensor product of Alice’s and Bob’s respec-
tive Hilbert space. This kind of localization is a priori
unrelated to relativistic locality, and it turns out that
for building a fully relativistic quantum theory it is too
narrow. Detailed knowledge about the relativistic local-
ization structures has been accumulated during the last
three decades in a research programme known variously
as “algebraic quantum ﬁeld theory” or “local quantum
physics” [2–4]. Quantum information theoretical aspects
have also been studied within this framework (See e.g.
[5–7] and references cited therein). Technically, the main
change is related to the fact that one has to deal with in-
ﬁnitely many degrees of freedom, and occurs in a similar
1

===== PAGE 2 =====

way when discussing statistical mechanics in the ther-
modynamic limit [8]: the observable algebra of a local
subsystem can no longer be taken as the operators of the
form A ⊗ 1 with respect to some tensor product decom-
position of the underlying Hilbert space. Instead, more
general von Neumann algebras must appear as observ-
able algebras. We will brieﬂy comment on the changes
this introduces in the concepts of localized operations in
the last section.
II. DEFINITION OF LOCALIZATION
PROPER TIES
As is well known, physical operations can be described
either in the Schr¨ odinger picture, by a map acting on
states or density matrices or, equivalently, in the Heisen-
berg picture, by an operator acting on observables. In
spite of this equivalence, however, some things and espe-
cially localization properties and the Stinespring dilation
are stated more easily in the Heisenberg picture. There-
fore we will work in the Heisenberg picture.
We recall some basic notions and notations. In the
Heisenberg picture an operation [9] taking systems with
Hilbert space Hin to systems with Hilbert space Hout
is a completely positive operator E: B(Hout) → B(Hin)
satisfying E(1) ≤ 1. The corresponding map E∗ in the
Schr¨ odinger picture acts on a density matrix ρ on Hin
such that
tr(E∗ (ρ) A) = tr( ρ E (A)) ∀A ∈ B(Hout) . (2)
The conditions on E are equivalent to E∗ being like-
wise completely positive, and satisfying the normaliza-
tion condition tr(E∗ (ρ)) ≤ 1 for all density operators ρ. If
E∗ is even trace preserving (equivalently: E(1) = 1), we
call the operation non-selective, or a channel [10]. As the
name suggests, selective operations typically occur, when
part of the operation is a selection of a sub-ensemble ac-
cording to measuring results obtained by the device.
The four properties in diagram (1) all refer to an op-
eration E with Hin = Hout = HAB ≡ H A ⊗ H B.
Deﬁnition: A completely positive map (not necessarily
a channel) E: B(HAB) → B(HAB) is called
1. semicausal if it can be written as
E(a ⊗ 1B) = T (a) ⊗ 1B (3)
for all a ∈ B(HA) and for some completely positive
map T : B(HA) → B(HA).
2. causal if it semicausal in both directions, i.e. if
E(a ⊗ 1B) = T (a) ⊗ 1B and (4)
E(1A ⊗ b) = 1A ⊗ T ′(b) (5)
for all a ∈ B(HA), b ∈ B(HB) and for some com-
pletely positive maps T : B(HA) → B(HA) and
T ′: B(HB) → B(HB).
3. localizable if it can be decomposed into
E = G ⊗ F (6)
where F : B(HB) → B(HB) is a channel and
G: B(HA) → B(HA) a completely positive map.
4. semilocalizable if it can be decomposed into
E = (G ⊗ idB) ◦ (idA ⊗ F ) (7)
where F : B(HB) → B(HCB ) is a channel,
G: B(HAC ) → B(HA) a completely positive map
and HC a ﬁnite dimensional Hilbert space.
III. SEMICAUSAL OPERATIONS ARE
SEMILOCAL
We are now prepared to give the proof of the conjec-
ture by DiVincenzo, of which the special case of complete
measurements was treated in [1].
Theorem: A completely positive map (not necessarily a
channel) is semilocal if and only if it is semicausal.
Before going into the proof, we point out some salient
facts about the Stinespring representation of a com-
pletely positive map [11].
a. The Stinespring representation: The Stinespring
representation theorem, as adapted to maps between ﬁ-
nite dimensional quantum systems, states that any com-
pletely positive map E: B(Hout) → B(Hin) can be writ-
ten as
E(a) = V ∗ (a ⊗ 1K)V (8)
with a linear operator V : Hin → H out ⊗ K , where K is a
ﬁnite dimensional Hilbert space, called the dilation space.
The representation (8) is called minimal if (and only if)
the set of vectors
(a ⊗ 1K)V ϕ (9)
with a ∈ B(Hout) and ϕ ∈ H in spans Hout ⊗ K .
b. Uniqueness: The main step of the proof will be
to get a factorization of the given operation into two op-
erations with suitable localization properties. It turns
out that such a factorization is provided precisely by the
uniqueness statement for the Stinespring dilation. We
therefore explain this uniqueness in more detail.
Suppose that E has a minimal Stinespring represen-
tation (8) as well as a further (not necessarily minimal)
one
2

===== PAGE 3 =====

E(a) = V ∗
1 (a ⊗ 1K1)V1 (10)
with another linear map V1: H → H ⊗ K 1. Since rep-
resentation (8) is taken to be minimal, we conclude
dim(K) ≤ dim(K1) and the prescription
˜U (a ⊗ 1K)V ψ := (a ⊗ 1K1)V1ψ (11)
yields a well deﬁned isometry ˜U : H ⊗ K → H ⊗ K 1. This
can be easily veriﬁed by observing that all scalar products
between vectors such as the ones on the right hand side
of (11) are ﬁxed by the relation (10). From this deﬁnition
of ˜U we ﬁnd that the intertwining relation
˜U (a ⊗ 1K) = ( a ⊗ 1K1) ˜U (12)
holds for each a ∈ B(H). Hence ˜U must be decomposable
into
˜U = 1H ⊗ U (13)
with an isometry U : K → K 1. If both representations
(8) and (10) are minimal the dimensions of the dilation
spaces coincide and U must be a unitary operator. The
minimal Stinespring representation is thus unique up to
a unitary transformation.
c. Kraus operators: In most of the current litera-
ture the Stinespring dilation is used only in the form
of a corollary, called the Kraus representation of a com-
pletely positive map. If we introduce an orthonormal
basis ( ε1, · · ·, εk) of the dilation space K and deﬁne the
“Kraus operators” Kα: Hin → H out by
V ψ =
∑
α
(Kαψ) ⊗ εα ∀ψ ∈ H in, (14)
we can write the dilation formula (8) as E(a) =∑k
α=1 K ∗
αaKα for all a ∈ B(Hout). Of course, every-
thing we do in this paper could be formulated in terms
of Kraus operators. We found this less practical, how-
ever, because the above uniqueness statement becomes
more involved: The choice of the basis εα always intro-
duces some arbitrariness, so even in the minimal case
the collection of Kraus operators is only unique up to a
unitary transformation acting on the index α.
Proof of Theorem: As noted in the introduction the
implication “semilocalizable= ⇒ semilocal” is trivial. In
the notation of Section II it becomes
E(a ⊗ 1B) = G(a ⊗ 1C ) ⊗ 1B
so (3) follows with T (a) := G(a ⊗ 1C).
For the reverse implication, let E: B(HAB) →
B(HAB) be a semicausal operation, i.e. an operation ful-
ﬁlling (3) for some completely positive map T : B(HA) →
B(HA). The Stinespring representation of E gives us
a dilation space HD and a linear operator V : HAB →
HABD , HABD ≡ H AB ⊗ H D, such that
E(a ⊗ b) = V ∗ (a ⊗ b ⊗ 1D)V (15)
for each a ∈ B(HA) and b ∈ B(HB). Analogously we get
a dilation space HC and a linear operator W : HA → H AC
from the minimal Stinespring representation of T :
T (a) = W ∗ (a ⊗ 1C)W (16)
for all a ∈ B(HA). According to the relation (3) we
obtain
V ∗ (a ⊗ 1BD )V = (W ∗ ⊗ 1B)(a ⊗ 1CB )(W ⊗ 1B) (17)
for all a ∈ B(HA) [12]. The uniqueness of the minimal
Stinespring representation now implies the existence of
an isometry U : HCB → H BD (see Eq. (13)) such that
(a ⊗ 1BD )V = (1A ⊗ U )(a ⊗ 1CB )(W ⊗ 1B) (18)
and therefore
V = (1A ⊗ U )(W ⊗ 1B) . (19)
From this we obtain a completely positive unital map
F : B(HB) → B(HCB ) by taking
F (b) := U ∗ (b ⊗ 1D)U (20)
for every b ∈ B(HB) and a completely positive (not nec-
essarily unital) map G: B(HAC ) → B(HA):
G(a ⊗ c) := W ∗ (a ⊗ c)W (21)
for every a ∈ B(HA) and c ∈ B(HC ). Thus we conclude
from (15) and (19) that the identity (7) holds. In other
words, E is semilocalizable. ✷
IV. OUTLOOK
As already indicated in the introduction, quantum ﬁeld
theory requires a more general setup than the one used
in this note and in [1]. Relativistic localization is then
expressed by assigning to every spacetime region the alge-
bra of observables, which can be measured in that region,
typically a von Neumann algebra. Signal causality then
means that whenever two regions are spacelike separated
(no causal signals can be exchanged) the corresponding
algebras commute elementwise. One might try replac-
ing this by an assignment of “local Hilbert spaces” to
spacetime regions, such that the union of spacelike sep-
arated regions corresponds to the Hilbert space tensor
product. This is not possible, however, because space-
time regions can be split into ﬁner and ﬁner pieces, and
this would create diﬃculties for the tensor products, es-
pecially when the overall Hilbert space is required to be
3

===== PAGE 4 =====

separable (to have a countable orthonormal basis), and
relativistic invariance is imposed.
Surprisingly the von Neumann algebras of local regions
are all isomorphic under mild axiomatic assumptions.
More speciﬁcally they are all isomorphic to the unique
hyperﬁnite type III 1-factor (see [14] for an explanation
of these terms, and the proof). Nevertheless the localiza-
tion structure is far from trivial, and resides in the way
these algebras are nested into each other. Already for
the inclusion of two such algebras an amazing variety is
possible.
As might be expected from the heuristic argument at
the beginning of this section, the small distance local-
ization structure in quantum ﬁeld theory deviates dra-
matically from what would be expected from Hilbert
space tensor products. Suppose Alice and Bob operate
in spacelike separated regions, and A and B are the local
von Neumann algebras assigned to these regions. Then
when the regions are very close together, no physical [13]
product states exist, hence there are no separable states
at all. In fact, all physical states violate the CHSH-Bell
inequality maximally [6].
On the other hand, if the regions are a ﬁnite distance
apart, the so-called split property holds, which is equiva-
lent to the existence of many separable states, or to the
possibility for Bob to prepare any state of his subsystem
locally without disturbing Alice’s [5]. Algebraically this
means that the von Neumann algebra generated by A
and B is isomorphic to the von Neumann algebra tensor
product A
⊗ B [15].
The notion of semicausality is easy to express in this
context: that E maps operators of the form a ⊗ 1 to op-
erators of the same form just means that Alice’s algebra
is invariant in the sense that a ∈ A =⇒ E(a) ∈ A, or
brieﬂy E(A) ⊂ A.
It is not so clear what should be understood by semilo-
cality. The reason is that one has to decide what degree
of independence should be postulated for the intermedi-
ate system C, sent from Alice to Bob in Figure 1. If we
require the kind of independence valid for widely sepa-
rated regions (split property), as suggested by the image
of a system being “sent”, the Theorem is probably false.
Although the Stinespring decomposition for semicausal
maps is well understood, it is not clear what factoriza-
tions would be meaningful interpretations of Figure 1.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Funding by the European Union project EQUIP (con-
tract IST-1999-11053) and ﬁnancial support from the
DFG (Bonn) are gratefully acknowledged.
[1] D. Beckman, D. Gottesman, M. A. Nielsen and John
Preskill, quant-ph/0102043 (2001).
[2] H. Araki, Mathematical theory of quantum ﬁelds, Oxford
University Press, (1999)
[3] H.-J. Borchers, Translation group and particle represe n-
tations in quantum ﬁeld theory, Lecture Notes in Physics
(Springer Verlag, Berlin), 1996.
[4] R. Haag, Local quantum physics, Springer-Verlag, Berli n
1992. (A second edition was released in 1996.)
[5] R.F. Werner, Local preparability of states and the split
property in quantum ﬁeld theory, Lett. Math. Phys. 13
(1987) 325-329.
[6] S.J. Summers, R.F. Werner, Maximal violation of Bell’s
inequalities for algebras of observables in tangent space-
time regions, Ann. Inst. H. Poincar´ e, A 49 (1988) 215-
243.
[7] R. Clifton, H. Halvorson, Entanglement and open
systems in algebraic quantum ﬁeld theory, quant-
ph/0001107.
[8] O. Bratteli and D.W. Robinson, Operator algebras and
quantum statistical mechanics, two volumes, (Springer
Verlag, New York) 1979 and 1981.
[9] E. B. Davies, Quantum Theory of Open Systems, Aca-
demic Press 1976.
[10] In [1] the term superoperator is used for (the dual map
of) a channel.
[11] W. F. Stinespring, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 6, 211-216
(1955).
[12] Note that if W is a minimal dilation of T then so is
W ⊗ 1B for E.
[13] Here “physical state” technically means a “normal” sta te,
i.e., a state which can be represented by a density opera-
tor on the Hilbert space of the global system, as opposed
to “singular” states. For the purposes of this discussion
it is suﬃcient to require “local normality”, i.e., that the
restriction to bounded spacetime regions can be repre-
sented in this way. Roughly speaking this requires that
no inﬁnite amount of energy needs to be invested in a
ﬁnite region to prepare the state. This property allows
also temperature states of ﬁnite density, which are glob-
ally diﬀerent (singular) from the vacuum, but not locally.
[14] H. Baumg¨ artel and M. Wollenberg, Causal nets of oper-
ator algebras, Akademie Verlag Berlin, 1992.
[15] S. Sakai, C*-algebras and W*-algebras, Classics in Mat h-
ematics, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg New York,
1971.
4